TITLE: Dozens of Police Agencies in California Are Still Sharing Driver Locations with Anti-Abortion States
PUBLISHER: ACLU
DATE: 2024
URL: https://www.aclu.org/news/privacy-technology/dozens-of-police-agencies-in-california-are-still-sharing-driver-locations-with-anti-abortion-states-were-fighting-back
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Skip navigation

Back to

 News & Commentary
 

 Dozens of Police Agencies in California Are Still Sharing Driver Locations with Anti-Abortion States. We're Fighting Back. 

 

 Automatic license plate readers collect and store highly sensitive information that can reveal where we work, live, worship, or seek reproductive health services. Sharing any ALPR information with out-of-state or federal law enforcement agencies has been forbidden in California since 2016. 

 

Nick Hidalgo
,

ACLU of Northern California

Matt Cagle

Share This Page

February 13, 2024

Over the last decade, California has built up some of the nation’s strongest driver privacy protections, thanks to the hard work of activists, civil rights groups, and elected leaders.

One law in particular, often called 
SB 34
, prohibits police from circulating detailed maps of people’s driving patterns with the federal government and agencies in other states– a protection that has only grown more important with the end of 
Roe v. Wade
 and the subsequent surge in abortion criminalization.

But dozens of California police departments have decided to defy the law, even after receiving 
clear guidance
 from California Attorney General Rob Bonta, the chief law enforcement officer in the state. Last month the ACLU of Northern California and our partners 
sent Attorney General Bonta a letter
 listing 35 police agencies that have refused to comply with the law and protect driver privacy.

We should all be able to drive to a doctor’s office, place of worship, or political rally without being tracked and cataloged by police agencies. But for years now, police have used automated license plate readers (ALPRs) to record and track the movements of drivers on a previously unseen scale. These 
systems
 allow police to collect and store information about drivers whose cars pass through ALPR cameras’ fields of view, which, along with the date and time of capture, can reveal sensitive details about our movements and, as a result, our private lives.

 

 You Are Being Tracked: How License Plate Readers Are Being Used to Record Americans' Movements 

Source: American Civil Liberties Union

The ACLU has long seen the danger ALPR surveillance poses, and working alongside communities on the ground, has fought to bolster California’s legal protections for driver privacy. For over a decade, we have conducted investigations, advocacy, and litigation focused on how police agencies use ALPR to track law-abiding drivers, amass hordes of sensitive information, and use it to harm people.

In the wake of 
ACLU’s groundbreaking report
 on ALPR across the US, 
we called out
 police use of ALPRs in 2013 as a threat to driver privacy and warned that California lacked statewide driver privacy protections. In 2016, thanks in part to the advocacy of the ACLU and 
allies
, the California legislature passed 
SB 34
, the law at issue today. In 
2019
 we discovered Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s (ICE) exploitation of ALPR-collected information to track and target immigrants in California and across the United States.

From there, we took action to enforce California’s driver privacy protections. In 
2021
 we sued Marin County, California for illegally sharing millions of local drivers’ license plates and locations with federal and out-of-state agencies, including ICE. The sheriff eventually agreed to comply with SB 34 as part of a 
settlement agreement
, but we believed that many other California police agencies were still violating SB 34.

We rang the alarm again in the wake of the 
Dobbs 
decision overturning 
Roe v. Wade.
 Alongside our partners at the Electronic Frontier Foundation and ACLU of Southern California, we 
sent letters to over 70 law enforcement agencies in California
 demanding they stop sharing people’s driving patterns with states that have criminalized abortion care. We also notified the attorney general’s office of these violations.

Following our letters, the attorney general issued 
instructions
 to police across the state to follow SB 34’s plain text and cease sharing license plate information with state and federal agencies outside California. While some agencies have come into compliance, many police are digging in and refusing to follow the law. Police lobbyists have even 
asked
 the attorney general to withdraw his interpretation of the law.

Simply put, the position touted by police agencies and their lobbyists puts Californians at risk. SB 34 is important because when police track and share the locations of law-abiding drivers, that information can easily be used to facilitate racist policing, 
punitive fees
, and the 
discriminatory targeting
 of people in California and beyond. And, as 
our letters warned
, when California shares ALPR information with authorities in states with anti-abortion or anti-trans laws, police and prosecutors gain new power to track and prosecute people who traveled to California to receive reproductive or gender-affirming care.

We should all be able to travel safely on the state’s roads without our movements being handed to authorities outside the state. That is why we have continued to push California police agencies to follow California’s driver privacy law. And it’s why we have supported localities 
that reject
 ALPR programs at odds with their values.

It is unacceptable that police agencies charged with enforcing laws are refusing to comply with this one. While we are pleased with Attorney General Bonta’s strong statement on SB 34, we urge the attorney general to use all available means at his disposal to ensure compliance. And rest assured, that the ACLU will continue fighting to enact and enforce protections that keep all of us safe, no matter where we go in the state.

This article was 
originally featured
 on the blog of the ACLU of Northern California.

Related Issues

 

 Privacy & Technology 

 Human Rights and Privacy 

 Privacy and Surveillance 

 Human Rights 

 National Security 

Related Content

 

 Nevada 

 Sep 2026 

Privacy & Technology

National Security

 Killinger v. Jager 
 

 On September 21, 2026, the ACLU, ACLU of Nevada and the Innocence Project filed an amicus brief in the District of Nevada in support of Jason Killinger, a man wrongfully arrested after police relied on an incorrect result from facial recognition technology. 

Status:
 Ongoing

Killinger V. Jager. Explore Case. 

 

 Press Release 

 Sep 2026 

Privacy & Technology

 ACLU Privacy Expert to Testify at Bipartisan Senate Hearing on Flock and Other Automatic License Plate Readers 
 

 WHAT: The Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime and Counterterrorism will hold a hearing on Wednesday entitled, “Always Watching: Flock’s Nationwide AI Surveillance Network.” Testifying at this hearing will be privacy and surveillance expert Chad Marlow, a senior policy counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union. Marlow will detail how automatic license plate readers (ALPRs) like Flock are used to violate our rights, discuss the growing bipartisan movement against these creepy cameras, and underscore that the best privacy protection is to ban ALPRs altogether.
Marlow’s testimony comes as people across the country come together to oppose these cameras and urge their elected officials to get rid of them. The Institute for Justice has cataloged more than 200 incidents of ALPR abuse, including stalking, wrongful stops and detentions, non-law enforcement use, and other types of misconduct. Since the beginning of 2026, over 200 cities have terminated their contracts with Flock and other ALPR companies and that number keeps growing. In August, cities terminated their contracts at a rate of more than three per day.
WHEN: 
Wednesday, September 23, 2026 at 2:30 p.m. ET
 WHO: 

Chad Marlow, Senior Policy Counsel, ACLU

Benn Jordan, Cybersecurity Engineer

Lindsey Isaacs, Wrongfully Accused Driver

Alasdair Whitney, Legislative Counsel, Institute for Justice

The Honorable Ross Teeple, Sheriff for Pinal County

WHERE: 
Dirksen Senate Office Building Room 562
*Livestream can be found here. Chad will be available for questions and interviews following the hearing. Please reach out to Allegra Harpootlian with any requests. 

Aclu Privacy Expert To Testify At Bipartisan Senate Hearing On Flock And Other Automatic License Plate Readers. Explore Press Release. 

 

 Oregon Supreme Court 

 Aug 2026 

Privacy & Technology

 State v. Lane 
 

 Oregon law enforcement, without a warrant, installed surveillance cameras on two telephone poles near Petitioner’s home and recorded activity there for a month. The State argues that police can continuously surveil our most private spaces—our homes—without judicial oversight. The ACLU's Speech, Privacy, and Technology Project and State Supreme Court Initiative, alongside the ACLU of Oregon and the Oregon Criminal Defense Lawyers Association, filed an amicus brief arguing that police were required to obtain a warrant before conducting the extensive pole-camera surveillance at issue this case. 

Status:
 Ongoing

State V. Lane. Explore Case. 

 

 Press Release 

 Sep 2026 

Privacy & Technology

 ACLU Urges Senate to Block AI Experimentation Provision in Crypto Bill 
 

 WASHINGTON — The Senate will take a procedural vote on the Clarity Act today, which includes a provision that would give companies a free pass to experiment on “AI test projects” without transparency or oversight. The American Civil Liberties Union argues that this is unneeded both because of how fast artificial intelligence is already growing, and also because of the harm it could cause to individuals’ rights.
“Companies have plenty of freedom to do basic research on AI. But they shouldn’t have the freedom to use the American people as guinea pigs by subjecting them to harmful experiments that violate existing laws meant to protect people,” said Jina John, senior policy counsel on AI at the ACLU. “At the very moment that AI leaders are warning of catastrophic risks and urging Congress to regulate AI, Congress must not pass any law that would endanger people’s rights and liberties for the sake of AI experimentation.”
Section 509 of the bill would establish a scheme for companies to seek waivers from any regulation from a financial regulator, including those related to privacy, security, consumer protection, and civil rights. That means companies could conduct AI experiments that risk exposing consumers’ financial data or be used to develop products that make decisions about lending, housing, and other important areas without providing notice about adverse actions or considering the potential for discrimination, all without oversight. The ACLU and a coalition of other rights groups recently sent a letter to Congress outlining the dangers of this provision for privacy rights and the right to be free from discrimination in key economic transactions. 

Aclu Urges Senate To Block Ai Experimentation Provision In Crypto Bill. Explore Press Release.