TITLE: Washington enacts first regulations on license plate readers
PUBLISHER: ACLU of Washington
DATE: 2026
URL: https://www.aclu-wa.org/news/washington-enacts-first-regulations-on-license-plate-readers/
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Washington enacts first regulations on license plate readers 

 The Driver Privacy Act established regulations for state agencies that use ALPRs, providing protections in multiple important ways. 

 May 27, 2026 

 Share this page	

 

LaVendrick Smith
 

 

 

 ACLU-WA Media and Communications Strategist 

This law must be a floor, not a ceiling. We will continue to fight to ensure everyone in our state can move freely and safely without fearing the government is watching and tracking their every move.”

 — 
Tee Sannon, technology policy program director for the ACLU-WA

In the 2026 Legislative Session, the ACLU of Washington went to Olympia with the goal of reining in surveillance technology that, for years, has been used to monitor Washington drivers unchecked.

Automated license plate readers (ALPRs) are cameras that scan and store license plate data from countless drivers every day, as they go about their daily routines. Government agencies use ALPRs, also known as Flock Cameras, to track where people drive and when.

But the data collected by ALPRs is exploitable, and agencies such as police departments regularly share their data with outside entities, including the federal government. This raises privacy concerns and civil liberties implications, as bad actors have used license plate data to monitor and target everyone from immigrants and people seeking health care, to protestors or people expressing dissenting viewpoints.

To address these concerns in Washington and ensure everyday people aren’t being tracked when driving around their communities, the ACLU-WA supported the Driver Privacy Act (Senate Bill 6002). Signed into law in March, the Driver Privacy Act established regulations for state agencies that use ALPRs, providing protections in multiple important ways.

The law’s biggest feature is that it prohibits agencies from using ALPRs around sensitive locations where protecting privacy is paramount. These locations include facilities that offer protected health care or immigration-related services, places of worship, and schools, among other similar facilities.

The Driver Privacy Act further prohibits agencies from using the cameras for immigration investigations and enforcement altogether, or from tracking people who access protected health services or people who engage in constitutionally protected activities such as protesting.

It also requires law enforcement to have a warrant before accessing ALPR data from private entities. These and other provisions combine to give Washington the state’s first regulations on the technology.

“The Driver Privacy Act is a first step toward addressing the use of ALPRs, which have been used for far too long to monitor countless people in our state without any rules or meaningful opportunities for redress," Tee Sannon, technology policy program director for the ACLU-WA said after the bill was signed. “While more protections are needed, this new law establishes some initial protections to guard against misuse — particularly in ways that harm vulnerable communities, including immigrants and people seeking reproductive or gender-affirming health care.”

The law’s full impact waits to be seen, and there are valid reasons to wonder how effective it will be. The law signed by Gov. Bob Ferguson had changes that veered from the initial protections.

For example, the current law allows agencies to hold onto everyone’s license plate data for 21 days, which is only slightly better than the pre-law status quo, when police could hold onto the data for 30 days or more. The ACLU-WA advocated for as minimal a retention time as possible — no more than 7 days — to avoid the harmful effects of an agency holding onto data for longer than needed.

For that change and others, the ACLU-WA doesn’t think the law goes far enough to fully meet the moment. But there have been unexpected benefits of the law passing. The city of Seattle turned off its cameras completely while determining how to move forward with the law. Something similar happened in Pierce County, where the sheriff’s office deactivated their ALPR cameras after the bill was signed because of complications complying with the law.

Sannon and the ACLU hope the Driver Privacy Act is the start of meaningful regulation for the cameras, with more discussions to follow.

“This law must be a floor, not a ceiling,” Sannon said in the March statement. “We will continue to fight to ensure everyone in our state can move freely and safely without fearing the government is watching and tracking their every move.”

Related Issues

 

 Freedom to Travel 

 Privacy 

 Surveillance 

 Technology 

 View All Issues 

 Stay Informed 

 Sign up to be the first to hear about how to take action. 

 By completing this form, I agree to receive occasional emails per the terms of the ACLU’s 
privacy statement.
 

 By completing this form, I agree to receive occasional emails per the terms of the ACLU’s 
privacy statement
.	

English