TITLE: LAPD Special Order No. 31: ALPR Usage and Privacy Policy
PUBLISHER: Los Angeles Police Department
DATE: 2020-12-10
URL: https://lapdonlinestrgeacc.blob.core.usgovcloudapi.net/lapdonlinemedia/2021/11/so31-12-10.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
SPECIAL ORDER NO. 31 December 10, 2020
APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS ON DECEMBER -~,~~620
SUBJECT: AUTOMATED LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION USAGE AND
PRIVACY POLICY —ESTABLISHED
PURPOSE: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) technology is a valuable tool for
law enforcement and serves to enhance public safety when used appropriately.
As with any law enforcement capability, ALPR technology shall be used in a manner consistent
with the United States Constitution, the Fourth Amendment, and other applicable statutory
authorities. The purpose of this Order is to establish procedures to ensure that all activities
pertaining to the capture, use, retention, and dissemination of information obtained through the
ALPR System complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
PROCEDURE: AUTOMATED LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION USAGE AND
PRIVACY POLICY —ESTABLISHED. Department Manual Section
3/568.53, Automated License Plate Recognition Usage and Privacy Policy, has been established
and is attached.
AMENDMENT: This Order adds Section 3/568.53 to the Department Manual.
AUDIT RESPONSIBILITY: The Commanding Officer, Audit Division, shall review this
directive and determine whether an audit or inspection shall be conducted in accordance with
Department Manyal Section 0/080.30.
MICH~. MOORS
Chief of Police
Attachment
DISTRIBUTION "D"

DEPARTMENT MANUAL
VOLUME III
Revised by Special Order No. 31, 2020
568.53 AUTOMATED LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION USAGE AND PRIVACY
POLICY. The Department's Automated License Plate Recognition System (ALPR) System is a
computerized database resulting from the operation of one or more mobile or fixed cameras
( "ALPR Cameras "). When combined with computer algorithms, the ALPR System reads and
conveys images of license plates and the characters they contain into computer-readable data.
The data collected by the ALPR Cameras consists of a photo of the vehicle license plate, the
date, time, and location the photo was taken, and the identification number of the ALPR Camera
capturing the information. The ALPR System records and stores data, from license plates only.
When used effectively and in accordance with the law, the ALPR data can be a valuable tool in
solving crimes.
Authorized Uses. The ALPR System and the recording of ALPR data shall only be retained,
accessed, and used for the following official Department purposes:
• Criminal investigations or proceedings;
• Non-criminal investigations (e.g., missing and found persons);
• Administrative investigations or proceedings (e.g., pursuit and complaint investigations);
• Civil investigations or proceedings;
• Situational awareness operations; and
• Responses to cognizable threats to public safety.
Limitations on Use of ALPR Data. The Department's ALPR Cameras shall only be used to collect
and record information that is exposed to public view where there is no reasonable expectation of
privacy (e.g., vehicle(s) on public roadways or on private property but whose license plates) are
visible fi~om a public place).
Moreover, the Department's ALPR System shall only be accessed and used on a "need to know "
and "right to know "basis. This means the person accessing the information must have both the
lawful authority to receive the information and an investigative purpose for the information in
order to carry out official responsibilities. The ALPR data shall only be collected, recorded,
retained, accessed, and used for official Department-related purposes that are in accordance
with this policy and applicable law. Any use of the ALPR System for non-official purposes may
subject an employee to discipline and, depending on the misuse, shall result in deactivation of
the employee 's ALPR account for a period of time. Moreover, an attempt of an improper or
actual login by a deactivated employee shall be captured in audit trails and reported to
Professional Standards Bureau.
Persons Authorized to Access and Use the ALPR Data. There are two type of users authorized
to use the ALPR System: ALPR System Administrators and ALPR Data Users. Each type of user
is given different access controls, responsibilities, and training.
ALPR System Administrators —Defined. Department personnel assigned within Information
Technology Bureau (ITB) have the highest access rights to the ALPR System. The ITB is
responsible for ensuring the maintenance of the ALPR server, database, application software,
and verifying proper operation of the system. The ALPR System Administrators are also
responsible for assisting in any reports of inoperability or malfunction ofALPR-equipped
vehicles.

DEPARTMENT MANUAL
VOLUME III
Revised by Special Order No. 31, 2020
ALPR Data Users —Defined. Any active Department employees (both sworn and civilian) or
independent contractors, who have received written authorization from their supervisor and
have been granted permission from ITB to query the ALPR System.
Note: Employees equipped with the ALPR Cameras in their Department vehicles may
receive an ALPR Hit, and when used for this purpose officers receive on-the job training.
They have no ability to add, remove, or change any information in the ALPR System.
ALPR Data Users Training. All ALPR Data Users shall complete one of the Department's
POST-certified training courses on accessing and using ALPR data prior to querying the ALPR
System. A second course is offered as supplemental training for ALPR Data Users on search
capabilities.
ALPR System Administrators. All ALPR System Administrators shall receive training to fulfill
their job responsibilities by a current ALPR System Administrator and/or vendor prior to
accessing the ALPR System as an ALPR System Administrator.
Note: Any ALPR Data User or ALPR System Administrator who has not used their ALPR
System account for one year and whose duties require their use of the ALPR System, shall
complete a reorientation training course prior to accessing the ALPR System.
Sharing of ALPR Data. The ALPR System is a valuable investigative tool and shall be used
appropriately in accordance with this policy and the provisions of the law. When sharing
information from the ALPR System, Department employees shall do so with integrity and
confidentiality. All ALPR data recorded and/or retained by the Department shall not be sold,
shared, transferred, or otherwise disclosed for commercial purposes or to persons or entities
that are not authorized to record, retain, access or use ALPR data. The ALPR data shall only be
shared with other local law enforcement agencies that have an interagency agreement with the
Department. All current and future contracts shall be reviewed and contain a clause prohibiting
the sharing of Department ALPR data outside of the agency with whom the Department has an
agreement.
Retention and Deletion of ALPR Data. In general, ALPR data recorded or retained by the
Department shall be retained for a period of two years. After two years, ALPR data recorded or
retained by the Department will be logically deleted. Logical deletion is the process whereby the
data record is flagged in the database when deleted. The ALPR records that have been logically
deleted cannot be viewed or accessed by ALPR Data Users and can only be queried by an ALPR
System Administrator. All ALPR data shall be permanently deleted after five years, and 24 hours
and one minute, with the exception of data needed for prosecutions or administrative hearings
that are retained indefinitely upon approval.
Retaining ALPR Data Beyond the Two-Year Logical Deletion Period for Ongoing
Prosecution/Administrative Purposes. In the event ALPR data is determined to have evidentiary
value in a criminal or administrative investigation, the investigator shall submit an
Intradepartmental Correspondence, Form 1 S. 02.00, to an ALPR System Administrator
requesting that the information be saved beyond the two year retention period. The written
request shall include the Division of Records (DR) Number or case number, the specific reason
the data should be retained, and the investigator's contact information. Once the request has
2

DEPARTMENT MANUAL
VOLUME III
Revised by Special Order No. 31, 2020
been approved by the investigator's supervisor, the ALPR System Administrator shall ensure the
requested information is retained in the ALPR System until it has been approved for deletion.
Every two years, ITB shall verify with the investigating officer zf the information is eligible for
deletion.
Note: Investigating officers are encouraged to keep any related ALPR data hard copies in
their case files) for court purposes.
The ALPR data that has been logically deleted will only be searchable under the following
circumstances:
• The investigation is related to a "serious felony" as defined in California Penal Code
(PC) 1192.7(c), and/or a "violent felony" as defined in California Penal Code 667.5(c);
• The investigation is related to a violation of 136.1 PC —Intimidation of Witnesses and
Victims when it is accompanied by force or by an express or implied threat of force or
violence; in furtherance of a conspiracy; with a prior conviction for a violation of this
section, or when committed for pecuniary gain;
• The investigation is related to a violation of 236.1— Human Trafficking;
• The investigation is related to a violation of 273.6(a) PC —Violation of a Protective
Order;
• The investigation is related to a violation of 646.9 PC —Stalking;
• The investigation is related to a violation of 290(c) PC —Sex Offender Registration;
• The investigation is related to terrorist activity, including individuals and groups who
plan, threaten, finance, aid/abet, and attempt or perform unlawful acts in furtherance of
terrorist activity (refer to Department Manual Section 4/271.46); or,
• Pursuant to a court order.
If the case investigator meets the above criteria and seeks to query ALPR data that has been
logically deleted, he or she shall request his or her Commanding Officer (CO) prepare an
Intradepartmental Correspondence, Form 1 S. 02.00, documenting the criteria has been met and
specifying the ALPR data requested.
The 1 S. 02.00 shall be submitted to the CO of ITB. If the CO of ITB approves the request, he or
she will forward the request to an ALPR System Administrator who will complete the search and
provide the data requested to the investigator.
Quality Assurance. The Department shall make reasonable efforts to assure the accuracy of
ALPR data. Department personnel are reminded that ALPR data, by itself, does not establish
probable cause to arrest and that further investigation is needed. Additionally, Department
personnel shall attempt to verify records obtained prior to conducting an investigative stop.
Department personnel who discover that an ALPR National Crime Information Center Want
contains an verified error, shall immediately notify Communications Division of the release of
the vehicle and/or vessel. Communications Divisions shall, without delay, broadcast a
cancellation of the want on the vehicle and/or vessel. Patrol officers assigned to Department
vehicles equipped with the ALPR Cameras shall attempt to verify the accuracy of the "Hot
Lists "data prior to conducting an investigation.
3

DEPARTMENT MANUAL
VOLUME III
Revised by Special Order No. 31, 2020
Data Security &Security Breach of Notification. The ALPR data shall be stored on a
Department-approved storage system compliant with standards established by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation 's Criminal Justice In, formation System (C1IS). Physical and remote
access to the data storage system shall be restricted to authorized persons only. Any Department
data storage system approved to store ALPR data shall be physically located on property owned
by the City of Los Angeles and/or within California Department of Justice compliant cloud
systems. The ITB shall ensure that the management and storage of ALPR data is recorded or
retained by the Department.
The Department shall immediately disclose to the California State Attorney General a breach in the
security of ALPR data, once the Department discovers or is notified of such breach of information.
If the breach potentially includes data of 500 or more persons, ITB shall submit the applicable
forms as required by California Civil Code s. 1798.29(e); and, California Civil Code s. 1798.82(fl,
to the California State Attorney General (See https://oag•ca• ~ov/privacy/databreach/report-a-
breach for additional details).
Custodian of ALPR System and Records. The CO of ITB shall be the official custodian of the
Department's ALPR system, unless otherwise designated by the Department. The ITB shall be
responsible for ensuring that the operation, management, and maintenance of the ALPR System
is in accordance with the procedures and guidelines set forth in this policy and applicable law.
Note: Whenever an ALPR System Administrator or an ALPR Data User separates from the
Department, their user account in the ALPR System shall be promptly deactivated and
deleted by ITB.
The ITB shall ensure that the ALPR System configurations and security features, as well as any
ALPR vendor agreements, contain appropriate privacy safeguards and data protections as
recommended by the best practices of the CJIS policy of the United States Department of Justice,
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Records of Access and Periodic System Audits. The ITB shall ensure that a database of records of
ALPR end-user activity, including all queries to the ALPR System is maintained. The records of
access shall be maintained for at least five (5) years. At a minimum, the records of access shall
include all of the following:
• The date and time the information is accessed;
• The license plate number or other data elements used to query the ALPR System;
• The username of the person who accessed the information; and,
• The identified authorized purpose for accessing the information.
The access and use ofALPR data through Department systems shall be subject to review and
audit by Audit Division. Audit Division shall conduct periodic audits in accordance with Audit
Division's Annual Audit Plan. Audit reports shall be maintained by the Department and
accessible for public view indefinitely. Moreover, ITB should regularly conduct inspections on
the use and the operations of the ALPR System.
If an officer assigned to an ALPR vehicle identifies an inoperable system, they shall complete a
Motor Vehicle Trouble Ticket, Form 11.03.00, to request the system to be repaired.