TITLE: LASD Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) Privacy Policy
PUBLISHER: Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department
DATE: 2026-04-22
URL: http://shq.lasdnews.net/content/uoa/epc/alprprivacypolicy.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department’s 
Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) Privacy Policy 
 
The purpose of this privacy policy is to ensure that all conduct of the Los Angeles 
County Sheriff’s Department (Department) and its personnel related to the capture, use, 
retention, and dissemination of information obtained through the use of the Automated 
License Plate Recognition (ALPR) System complies with all applicable federal, state, 
and local laws.  
 
ALPR technology is a valuable tool for law enforcement and when used appropriately 
serves to enhance public safety.  As with any law enforcement capability, the 
technology must be used in a manner that is consistent with the United States 
Constitution, including the Fourth Amendment, and other applicable statutory 
authorities.  
 
The Department acknowledges and fully intends to comply with the array of statutes, 
regulations, and policies that guide law enforcement on how it may and may not collect, 
retain, and disclose data, as well as requirements regarding notification in the event of a 
data breach. 
 
 
I. Authorized Purposes for Use of ALPR Technology 
 
The Department intends to the use ALPR technology for the following public safety 
purposes: 
 
 Investigation for prosecution or exoneration of suspected criminal (including 
terrorist) incidents.   
 Identification and/or location of wanted persons.  
 Enforcement of sanctions, orders, or sentences. 
 Crime prevention/general law enforcement purposes. 
 Crime analysis. 
 Investigatory leads in subsequent investigations. 
 
 
II. Persons Authorized to Use or Access ALPR Technology/Data 
 
Designated personnel appropriately trained on use of ALPR may gather data using 
ALPR technology. 
 
Information collected via ALPR technology will be analyzed only by qualified individuals 
who have successfully completed a background check, have appropriate security 
clearance and have been approved and trained accordingly.   
 
Sworn personnel or authorized civilian personnel (role-based such as crime analyst) will 
have general user access to the LASD ALPR database, as appropriate, to query 
information.  
 
Sworn personnel or authorized civilian personnel (role-based) of the Advanced 
Surveillance and Protection Unit (ASAP) or Sheriff’s Data Network (SDN) Unit will have 
administrative user access to the LASD ALPR database, as appropriate, to control:  

 
 The information to which a particular group or class of users can have access 
based on the group or class.  
 The information a class of users can access, including specific sites and/or data 
being utilized in specific investigations. 
 Sharing capabilities with other law enforcement agencies. 
 Any administrative or functional access required to maintain, control, administer, 
audit, or otherwise manage the data or equipment. 
 
 
III. Guidelines Regarding Appropriate Use 
 
ALPR data must be collected in a fair and lawful manner in the routine duties of law 
enforcement. 
 
LASD will not seek or retain information about individuals or organizations solely on the 
basis of religious, political, or social views or activities, participation in a particular 
noncriminal organization or lawful event, or race, ethnicity, citizenship, place of origin, 
age, disability, gender, or sexual orientation. 
 
Department members shall use information-gathering and investigative techniques that 
are the least intrusive means necessary in the particular circumstances to gather 
information the Department is authorized to seek and/or retain.   
 
Data shall only be accessed for appropriate, job-related functions.  Data shall not be 
used for any non-work-related purpose, and all uses shall take into consideration the 
privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties of individuals. 
 
 
IV. Quality Assurance 
 
The Department will investigate in a timely manner alleged errors and deficiencies (or 
will refer them to the originating agency) in order to correct, or refrain from using 
protected information found to be erroneous or deficient.  Original data will not be 
altered, changed, or modified in order to protect the integrity of the data.   
 
LASD will make every reasonable effort to ensure that information retained is derived 
from dependable and trustworthy sources which convey accurate, current, and 
complete information, including the relevant context in which the information was sought 
or received. 
 
The labeling of retained information (hotlist Information) will be evaluated by LASD or 
the originating agency when new information is gathered that may impact the reliability 
(content validity / software misread) of previously retained information. 
 
LASD will conduct periodic data quality reviews of information it originates and make 
every reasonable effort to ensure that the information from the ALPR System is correct.  
 
V. Sharing and Disclosure   
 
LASD does not share ALPR data with any contracted, commercial, or private entity. 

 
The provision of data hosting or towing services shall not be considered the sale, 
sharing, or transferring of ALPR information (see CA Civil Code 1798.90.55.(b)).  
 
Information gathered or collected and records retained by LASD may be accessed or 
disseminated for legitimate law enforcement, criminal justice, or public safety purposes 
only to persons or entities authorized by law to have such access and only for those 
uses and purposes specified in the law.  An audit trail sufficient to allow the identification 
of each individual who accessed information, and/or received information retained by 
LASD; the nature of the information requested and/or accessed, and the specific 
purpose will be retained by LASD for a minimum of two (2) years.   
 
Information gathered or collected and records retained by LASD will not be:  
 
 Sold, published, exchanged, or disclosed for commercial purposes.  
 Disclosed or published without authorization.  
 Disseminated to persons not authorized to access or use the information. 
 
LASD shall not confirm the existence or nonexistence of information to any person or 
agency that would not be eligible to receive the information unless otherwise required 
by law.   
 
LASD shares ALPR data with other law enforcement agencies upon the execution of an 
inter-agency agreement by which each agency agrees that all ALPR data will be 
gathered, accessed, utilized, and disclosed in accordance with applicable law, and 
further agrees:  
 
 ALPR data shall be available only to authorized users for legitimate law 
enforcement purposes. 
 Reasonable efforts will be made to ensure the accuracy of its data. 
 Shared hotlist data will not be stored for more than 24 hours without refresh. 
 Internal audits will be conducted periodically to ensure information is up to date 
and user queries are made for legitimate law enforcement purposes only.  
 Audit trails shall be maintained by each agency as defined by their policy. 
 
 
VI.  Information Retention and Destruction 
 
ALPR data will be maintained in accordance with applicable laws and County / 
Department retention policies.  Data associated with a specific investigation or 
prosecution will be retained until final disposition of the case, or until the data has no 
further value. 
 
Information will be reviewed for record retention (validation or purge) at five (5) years, 
and when information has no further value or meets the criteria for removal by 
applicable law, it will be purged or permanently deleted except in cases such as: 
 
 ALPR records related to a prosecution will be maintained until a final disposition 
has been reached in the case. 
 ALPR records can be maintained in the criminal case file and retained for the 
maximum period of time associated with such record. 

 ALPR records associated with criminal investigations will be maintained in the 
criminal case file and retained for the maximum period associated with such 
record. 
 Whenever otherwise directed by an executive of the Department for a particular 
case or internal investigation. 
 
LASD retains the right to remove ALPR data earlier, based on limitations of data 
storage requirements and other limitations including privacy concerns.  
 
 
VII. Accountability 
 
All personnel authorized to use or access ALPR technology or data will be accountable 
for knowledge of this policy. 
 
Department members shall report errors and suspected or confirmed violations of 
Department policies relating to protected information to their supervisor or manager. 
 
All access to the system will be logged, and the Department will maintain an audit trail 
of requested and accessed information, including the purpose of the query.  Periodic, 
random audits will be conducted to ensure and evaluate compliance with system 
requirements and with the provisions of this policy and applicable law.  Audit trails will 
be maintained by LASD for a minimum of two (2) years.   
 
LASD will annually conduct an inspection of the audit information contained in its 
database system(s).  The inspection will be conducted by the ASAP Unit.  The ASAP 
Unit has the option of conducting random inspections, without announcement, at any 
time and without prior notice.  The inspection will be conducted in such a manner as to 
protect the confidentiality, sensitivity, and privacy of the Department’s information 
system(s).   
 
 
VIII.  Custodian of ALPR System and Records 
 
Primary responsibility for the maintenance and operation of the ALPR database and 
coordination of personnel and agencies receiving, seeking, and evaluating the 
information as well as quality, analysis, destruction, sharing, disclosure, or 
dissemination of further information will be assigned to the Advanced Surveillance and 
Protection Unit (ASAP).  The ASAP Unit will serve as the Department’s custodian of 
records for the ALPR System and data.   
 
 
 
 
 
IX.  Training 
 
Field Operations Directive 09-004 (FOD) provides guidelines and procedures on the 
usage of ALPR equipment and has been provided and briefed to training staff at all 
stations regarding ALPR equipment usage and access.  All personnel authorized to use 
or access ALPR technology have been provided with all relevant policies, directives, 
and procedures related thereto and are accountable for knowledge thereof.    

 
There are formal training classes on the authorized search engines which access and 
query ALPR data.  Training is also conducted by station training personnel and the 
ASAP Unit.  The basic ALPR software interface is intuitive and specific queries can only 
be done after all the information is collected, including search purposes and identifying 
information as to the individual conducting the search.  There are also detailed help 
tutorials within the basic ALPR software to assist with helping each user to run certain 
basic queries.