TITLE: LAPD renews, expands some automatic license plate reader systems
PUBLISHER: NBC Los Angeles
DATE: 2025
URL: https://www.nbclosangeles.com/investigations/lapd-renews-expands-some-automatic-license-plate-reader-systems/3945420/
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Crime and Courts
 

 LAPD renews, expands some automatic license plate reader systems	

 After pausing contracts in July, the LAPD is moving towards new agreements that will increase collection of license plate data and give officers new artificial intelligence tools 

 By 
Eric Leonard
 
•

Published September 21, 2026
 
•

Updated on 
September 22, 2026
 at 
5:33 pm
 

BOOKMARKER

 

NBC Universal, Inc.

The LAPD’s new 10-year contract with Axon Enterprise will provide over 1,600 patrol car cameras with automatic license plate reader capabilities. Eric Leonard reports for the NBC4 News at 5 p.m. on Tuesday, Sept. 22, 2026.

The Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners Tuesday approved the LAPD's new 10-year, $235 million contract with the police technology company Axon Enterprise to have more than 1,600 patrol car cameras with automatic license plate reader capabilities.

The board also gave the greenlight to the police department so it can participate in a test program to begin attaching surveillance cameras to street lights around the city to collect even more license plate data.

 
Stream Los Angeles News for free, 24/7, wherever you are.
 
 
  WATCH HERE
 

The pilot program's contract "authorizes a no-cost, three-month pilot evaluation of the Axon Lightpost public safety solution, comprising streetlight-mounted hardware and automated license plate recognition software, to be conducted by Axon Enterprise, Inc. for the Los Angeles Police Department," according to a memo signed by LAPD Chief Jim McDonnell.

Crime and Courts

Jul 13
 

 Will LAPD halt the use of license plate readers? 

LAPD

Aug 14
 

 License plate readers face growing scrutiny over privacy and data sharing 

The light post agreement with Axon says a subcontractor called Ubicquia, Inc. will install the cameras, which clamp to the top of existing street lights and draw power from the light's electricity, 
according to Ubicquia's website
. It also boasts of the system's artificial intelligence capabilities to identify vehicles, license plates, pedestrians and other objects that pass into view.

The locations for these streetlight cameras were described as "TBA" or to be announced.

After the new, 10-year Axon contract for cameras, tasers and digital storage was presented for approval at Tuesday's Board of Police Commissioners meeting, it became the first renewal of ALPR services following the department's 
Office of Inspector General's report in July
 that urged the LAPD to reconsider its agreements with Axon and two other technology companies, Motorola Systems and Flock Safety, citing concerns about privacy and data sharing.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
View this post on Instagram
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Axon contract includes the replacement of thousands of body-worn video cameras and taser electronic stun guns, massive amounts of cloud storage for the video collected by officers and new artificial intelligence features that promise to write first drafts of police reports based on body-worn video recordings.

"Draft One is Axon's Al-assisted report-writing capability," the LAPD contract said. "It uses BWC (body-worn camera) audio and transcript content to produce a first-draft narrative for officer review. Phased rollout to LAPD officers begins January 2028 and will commence a pilot when LAPD is ready after contract execution."

The LAPD did not respond to a request for comment on the new agreements.

This article tagged under:

Crime and Courts
LAPD