TITLE: City of Seattle Master List of Surveillance Technologies
PUBLISHER: Seattle City Clerk
DATE: 2017-11-30
URL: https://clerk.seattle.gov/~CFS/CF_320558.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

11.30.2017 
City of Seattle  
M A S T E R  L I S T  O F  
S U R V E I L L A N C E  
T E C H N O L O G I E S 
 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page i 
CONTENTS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................ 1 
ABOUT THE MASTER LIST ....................................................... 2 
SURVEILLANCE ORDINANCE ........................................................................ 2 
MASTER LIST REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................... 2 
NEXT STEPS ................................................................................................. 3 
DEPARTMENT SUMMARY ....................................................... 4 
MASTER LIST .......................................................................... 1 
SEATTLE CITY LIGHT .................................................................................... 1 
SEATTLE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION ............................................ 2 
SEATTLE FIRE DEPARTMENT ........................................................................ 3 
SEATTLE POLICE DEPARTMENT ................................................................... 4 
APPENDIX A: METHODOLOGY ................................................ 8 
APPENDIX B: SURVEILLANCE CRITERIA .................................... 9 
 
 
 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 1 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
The Seattle City Council passed Ordinance 125376, known as the “Surveillance Ordinance”, to provide 
greater transparency to City Council and the public when the City acquires technology that meets the 
City’s definition of surveillance. The Surveillance Ordinance, which took effect on September 1, 2017, 
outlines requirements that include: surveillance technology review and approval by City Council before 
acquisition, Council review and approval via ordinance for existing technologies, and reporting about 
surveillance technology use and community impact. 
Surveillance Ordinance section three requires the City’s Chief Technology Officer to compile a Master 
List of surveillance technologies in use by City departments as of the date the Surveillance Ordinance 
took effect (“Master List”), and to submit this report within 90 days of the Surveillance Ordinance’s 
effective date (November 30, 2017).  
Department privacy champions worked with the Seattle IT Privacy Team to identify surveillance 
technologies in use. The list in this report represents the best effort of departments to identify existing 
technologies based on the definition and criteria outlined in the Surveillance Ordinance. Should 
additional technologies that were in use as of September 1, 2017 be discovered, this report will be 
amended and resubmitted. 
The following departments currently use surveillance technology. These departments will complete the 
retroactive approval process for these technologies as required by the Surveillance Ordinance. 
Department Number of 
Technologies 
Seattle City Light 3 
Seattle Department of Transportation 3 
Seattle Fire Department 3 
Seattle Police Department 19 
Total 28 
 
  

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 2 
ABOUT THE MASTER LIST  
This report was mandated as part the Surveillance Ordinance (125376) approved by City Council in 
August 2017. It was compiled with active input of all City departments. The Master List was compiled 
through the process detailed in Appendix A, using the criteria detailed in Appendix B.  
SURVEILLANCE ORDINANCE  
Ordinance 125376, also referred to as the “Surveillance Ordinance”, took effect on September 1, 2017 
and has implications for the acquisition of new technologies by the City, and technologies that are 
already in use that may fall under the new, broader definition of surveillance.  
SMC 14.18.020.B.1 charges the City’s Executive with developing a process to identify surveillance 
technologies subject to the Ordinance. Seattle IT, on behalf of the Executive, developed and 
implemented a process through which a privacy and surveillance review is completed prior to the 
acquisition of new technologies. This requirement, and the criteria used in the review process, are 
documented in Seattle IT Policy PR-02, the “Surveillance Policy”.  
MASTER LIST REQUIREMENTS 
Surveillance Ordinance section 3 requires the City’s Chief Technology Officer to compile a Master List of 
technologies in use as of September 1, 2017 that meets the definition of surveillance technology 
(“Master List”). Specifically, the Surveillance Ordinance states: 
Section 3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 14.18 of the Seattle Municipal Code, each 
City department may use surveillance technology that has not received prior Council approval 
under Chapter 14.18 when the technology is, as of the effective date of this ordinance, (1) in the 
department’s possession or (2) in the execution or closeout phase of acquisition or has had a 
purchase order issued, pursuant to the Chief Technology Officer’s authority under subsection 
3.23.030.C of the Seattle Municipal Code; provided, that the department complies with the 
procedures set forth in this section for Council approval. 
Each City department shall compile a list of all surveillance technology that it controls and is 
utilizing as of the effective date of this ordinance that are not covered by an exemption or 
exception to the requirements of this Chapter 14.18 of the Seattle Municipal Code and submit it 
to the CTO, or submit an affirmative statement that there are no such technologies. The list shall 
identify for each technology whether the technology has received prior Council approval under 
Chapter 14.18, and if so, the ordinance number. The CTO shall compile a Master List that 
contains the information submitted by each department and a final list that identifies separately 
for each department the order in which the technology is recommended to be brought to the 
Council for ordinance approval. The Master List shall be filed within 90 days of the effective date 
of this ordinance with the City Clerk, with an electronic copy to the Chair of the committee 
responsible for public safety, the Director of Central Staff, the Chief Technology Officer, and the 
Inspector General for Public Safety. The CTO may make corrections to the master list, which 
must be timely filed with the City Clerk. Each City department shall submit requests for 
surveillance technology ordinance approval consistent with Chapter 14.18 of the Seattle 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 3 
Municipal Code at a rate of at least one per month, or more when feasible, in list order, 
beginning no later than the end of the first quarter of 2018. The Council may revise or re-order 
the Master List by resolution. 
Note that technologies exempted from Surveillance Ordinance compliance in SMC 14.18.030 are not 
included in the Master List. 
NEXT STEPS 
After the submission of the Master List, departments will begin submitting Surveillance Impact Reports 
(SIRs) for Council approval at the rate of one per month, as required by the Surveillance Ordinance, 
starting no later than March 31, 2018.  
If a department discovers a technology currently in place that is not enclosed in this Master List and 
meets the definition of surveillance as well as the requirements of the Surveillance Ordinance, it must 
be reported to the CTO immediately. At that time, the discovered technology will be added to the 
Master List and reported to Council.  
  

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 4 
DEPARTMENT SUMMARY 
Between September 1, 2017, and November 15, 2017, the Privacy Team, led by the City’s Chief Privacy 
Officer, worked with departments to identify surveillance technologies that are currently in use. The 
table below notes if departments identified surveillance technologies in use within their department, 
and if so, how many.  
Note the Surveillance Ordinance exempts the Seattle Municipal Courts and Seattle Public Library from 
compliance with the Surveillance Ordinance’s requirements.   
Department 
Surveillance 
Technologies 
(Yes / No) 
Number of 
Technologies 
City Auditor No 0 
City Budget Office No 0 
Department of Education and Early Learning No 0 
Department of Neighborhoods No 0 
Finance and Administrative Services No 0 
Human Services Department No 0 
Legislative Department No 0 
Mayor’s Office No 0 
Office of Arts and Culture No 0 
Office of Civil Rights No 0 
Office of Economic Development, Office of Film and Music No 0 
Office of Housing No 0 
Office of Immigrant and Refugee Affairs No  0 
Office of Intergovernmental Relations No 0 
Office of Labor Standards No 0 
Office of Planning and Community Development No 0 
Office of Sustainability and the Environment No 0 
Office of the Hearing Examiner No 0 
Retirement Office No 0 
Seattle Center No 0 
Seattle City Attorney No 0 
Seattle City Light Yes 3 
Seattle Department of Construction and Inspections No 0 
Seattle Department of Human Resources No 0 
Seattle Department of Transportation Yes 3 
Seattle Fire Department Yes 3 
Seattle Information Technology No 0 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 5 
Department 
Surveillance 
Technologies 
(Yes / No) 
Number of 
Technologies 
Seattle Municipal Court Exempt N/A 
Seattle Parks & Recreation No 0 
Seattle Police Department Yes 19 
Seattle Public Library Exempt N/A 
Seattle Public Utilities No 0 
Total 28 
 
 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 1 
 
MASTER LIST 
Technologies in use as of the effective date of this Surveillance Ordinance are listed below, organized by 
department. Each department ranked the order in which they will prepare Surveillance Impact Reports 
(SIRs) for submission to Council. 
SEATTLE CITY LIGHT 
Seattle City Light (SCL) uses technology to ensure proper recording of electricity consumption, and is 
empowered by City of Seattle Ordinance (117490) to recover diverted power consumption. Additionally, 
federal regulatory requirements detail how SCL must monitor electrical usage. The tools and 
technologies listed below are used in the investigation of unbilled power usage as part of that obligation 
and as such meet the definition of surveillance and criteria for review. 
Technology Description 
Proposed 
Review 
Order 
Binoculars/Spotting 
Scope 
The spotting scope is used to read meters from a distance when 
direct access to the meter is obstructed.  Scopes are used by SCL’s 
Current Diversion team to conduct investigations. Use of this 
technology may occur without informing a domicile’s resident(s). 
1 
SensorLink Amp Fork 
The SensorLink Amp Fork is used by SCL’s Current Diversion team to 
measure the load on line-side entrance conductors, allowing SCL to 
determine the total amount of power being consumed at a service 
location. This tool provides an instantaneous reading to the group 
conducting the investigation. Use of this technology may occur 
without informing a domicile’s resident(s). 
2 
Check Meter Device 
This device measures the total amount of power being consumed at 
a service location where current diversion is confirmed or suspected.  
The device is set at the transformer and is used when a prolonged 
reading is desired by the Current Diversion team. Use of this 
technology may occur without informing a domicile’s resident(s). 
3 
 
  

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 2 
SEATTLE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
The Seattle Department of Transportation is empowered by authority of Seattle Municipal Code (SMC 
11.16) to monitor, record and optimize street use and traffic flow. The tools and technologies listed 
below are used in support of that mission, collecting and tracking identifiable individuals or vehicles and 
meet the definition and criteria for Council review. Ordinance and SMC authority for each technology is 
provide in the description field, below. 
Technology Description Proposed 
Review 
Order 
License Plate Readers  License Plate Reader (LPR) cameras are a specialized CCTV camera 
with built in software to help identify and record license plates on 
vehicles. Travel times are generated by collecting arrival times at 
various checkpoints and matching the vehicle license plate numbers 
between consecutive checkpoints.  
This information is collected under the authority of SMC 11.16.200 
requiring SDOT to keep records of traffic volumes. 
1 
Closed Circuit 
Television Equipment  
SDOT has cameras installed throughout the City to monitor 
congestion, incidents, closures, and other traffic issues. The 
technology provides the ability to see roads, providing engineers 
with the necessary information to manage an incident and identify 
alternate routes. Every camera is available for live viewing by the 
public via our Traveler Information Web Map 
(http://web6.seattle.gov/Travelers/). The video is not archived.  
This information is collected under the authority of SMC 11.16.200 
requiring SDOT to keep records of traffic volumes. 
2 
Acyclica Acyclica devices are in street furniture throughout the City and 
determine real time vehicle travel times in the City corridor by 
identifying WiFi-enabled devices in vehicles, such as smart phones, 
traveling between multiple sites. The identifying information is 
anonymized. Additionally, the data is deleted within 24 hours to 
prevent tracking devices over time. 
This information is collected under the authority of SMC 11.16.200, 
requiring SDOT to keep records of traffic volumes, as well as SMC 
11.16.220 requiring an annual report on traffic. 
3 
 
  

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 3 
SEATTLE FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Seattle Fire Department is committed to protecting life and property for Seattle residents. This requires 
the collection of photographic evidence and information at the scene of emergencies and other 
hazardous sites. This can include the capture of unidentifiable individuals and property as well as 
tracking of private inspection companies for compliance and documentation purposes.  
Technology Description 
Proposed 
Review 
Order 
Emergency Scene 
Cameras 
Photos at incidents (not retained after transmission per department 
policy) are collected as part of the investigation and documentation 
of emergency responses and may include photographs of 
identifiable individuals and property. 
1 
Hazmat Camera 
This wireless system transmits pictures related to hazardous 
materials sites to document and identify clean up and management 
requirements. 
2 
Computer-Aided 
Dispatch 
Computer-aided dispatch (CAD) is used to initiate public safety calls 
for service, dispatch, and to maintain the status of responding 
resources in the field. It is used by 911 dispatchers as well as by 
officers using mobile data terminals (MDTs) in the field. Use is opt-
in, but individuals may enter personally-identifying information 
about third-parties without providing notice to those individuals. 
3 
 
 
  

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 4 
SEATTLE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Seattle Police Department (SPD) uses technologies to protect public safety and property and investigate 
and resolve crimes committed in the City of Seattle.  
Note the Seattle City Council has mandated the submission of a Surveillance Impact Report for SPD’s 
new records management system, Mark 43. This technology does not meet the criteria for a surveillance 
technology, and thus is not listed in the table below. In the of transparency on a project of public 
interest, SPD will complete the SIR and related community engagement requirements as directed. 
Technology Description Proposed 
Review Order 
Automated License 
Plate Recognition 
(ALPR) 
ALPRs are computer-controlled, high-speed camera systems 
mounted on parking enforcement or police vehicles that 
automatically capture an image of license plates that come 
into view and converts the image of the license plate into 
alphanumeric data that can be used to locate vehicles 
reported stolen or otherwise sought for public safety 
purposes and to enforce parking restrictions.  
1 
Booking Photo 
Comparison Software 
(BPCS) 
BCPS is used in situations where a picture of a suspected 
criminal, such as a burglar or convenience store robber, is 
taken by a camera. The still screenshot is entered into BPCS, 
which runs an algorithm to compare it to King County Jail 
booking photos to identify the person in the picture to further 
investigate his or her involvement in the crime. Use of BPCS is 
governed by SPD Manual §12.045. 
2 
Forward Looking 
Infrared Real-time 
video (FLIR) 
Two King County Sheriff’s Office helicopters with Forward 
Looking Infrared (FLIR) send a real-time microwave video 
downlink of ongoing events to commanders and other 
decision-makers on the ground, facilitating specialized radio 
tracking equipment to locate bank robbery suspects and 
provides a platform for aerial photography and digital video of 
large outdoor locations (e.g., crime scenes and disaster 
damage, etc.).   
3 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 5 
Technology Description Proposed 
Review Order 
Undercover/ 
Technologies  
The following groups of technologies are used to conduct 
sensitive investigations and should be reviewed together. 
• Audio recording devices: A hidden microphone to 
audio record individuals without their knowledge. The 
microphone is either not visible to the subject being 
recorded or is disguised as another object. Used with 
search warrant or signed Authorization to Intercept 
(RCW 9A.73.200). 
• Camera systems: A hidden camera used to record 
people without their knowledge. The camera is either 
not visible to the subject being filmed or is disguised 
as another object. Used with consent, a search 
warrant (when the area captured by the camera is not 
in plain view of the public), or with specific and 
articulable facts that a person has or is about to be 
engaged in a criminal activity and the camera 
captures only areas in plain view of the public. 
• Tracking devices: A hidden tracking device carried by 
a moving vehicle or person that uses the Global 
Positioning System to determine and track the precise 
location.  U.S. Supreme Court v. Jones mandated that 
these must have consent or a search warrant to be 
used. 
4 
Computer-Aided 
Dispatch (CAD) 
CAD is used to initiate public safety calls for service, dispatch, 
and to maintain the status of responding resources in the 
field. It is used by 911 dispatchers as well as by officers using 
mobile data terminals (MDTs) in the field.  
 
5 
CopLogic  
System allowing individuals to submit police reports on-line 
for certain low-level crimes in non-emergency situations 
where there are no known suspects or information about the 
crime that can be followed up on. Use is opt-in, but individuals 
may enter personally-identifying information about third-
parties without providing notice to those individuals. 
6 
Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone 
A set of recording and tracking technologies contained in a 
phone that is used in hostage negotiation situations to 
facilitate communications. 
7 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 6 
Technology Description Proposed 
Review Order 
Remotely Operated 
Vehicles (ROVs) 
These are SPD non-recording ROVs/robots used by 
Arson/Bomb Unit to safely approach suspected explosives, by 
Harbor Unit to detect drowning victims, vehicles, or other 
submerged items, and by SWAT in tactical situations to assess 
dangerous situations from a safe, remote location. 
8 
911 Logging Recorder System providing networked access to the logged telephony 
and radio voice recordings of the 911 center. 9 
Computer, cellphone 
and mobile device 
extraction tools  
Forensics tool used with consent of phone/device owner or 
pursuant to a warrant to acquire, decode, and analyze data 
from smartphones, tablets, portable GPS device, desktop and 
laptop computers. 
10 
Video Recording 
Systems 
These systems are to record events that take place in a Blood 
Alcohol Concentration (BAC) Room, holding cells, interview, 
lineup, and polygraph rooms recording systems. 
11 
Washington State 
Patrol (WSP) Aircraft 
Provides statewide aerial enforcement, rapid response, 
airborne assessments of incidents, and transportation services 
in support of the Patrol's public safety mission. WSP Aviation 
currently manages seven aircraft equipped with FLIR cameras. 
SPD requests support as needed from WSP aircraft. 
12 
Washington State 
Patrol (WSP) Drones 
WSP has begun using drones for surveying traffic collision 
sites to expedite incident investigation and facilitate a return 
to normal traffic flow. SPD may then request assistance 
documenting crash sites from WSP. 
13 
Callyo 
This software may be installed on an officer’s cell phone to 
allow them to record the audio from phone communications 
between law enforcement and suspects. Callyo may be used 
with consent or search warrant. 
14 
I2 iBase 
The I2 iBase crime analysis tool allows for configuring, 
capturing, controlling, analyzing and displaying complex 
information and relationships in link and entity data. iBase is 
both a database application, as well as a modeling and 
analysis tool. It uses data pulled from SPD’s existing systems 
for modeling and analysis. 
15 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 7 
Technology Description Proposed 
Review Order 
Parking Enforcement 
Systems 
Several applications are linked together to comprise the 
enforcement system and used with ALPR for issuing parking 
citations. This is in support of enforcing the Scofflaw 
Ordinance SMC 11.35. 
16 
Situational Awareness 
Cameras Without 
Recording 
Non-recording cameras that allow officers to observe around 
corners or other areas during tactical operations where 
officers need to see the situation before entering a building, 
floor or room. These may be rolled, tossed, lowered or throw 
into an area, attached to a hand-held pole and extended 
around a corner or into an area. Smaller cameras may be 
rolled under a doorway. The cameras contain wireless 
transmitters that convey images to officers. 
17 
Crash Data Retrieval 
Tool that allows a Collision Reconstructionist investigating 
vehicle crashes the opportunity to image data stored in the 
vehicle’s airbag control module. This is done for a vehicle that 
has been in a crash and is used with consent or search 
warrant. 
18 
Maltego 
An interactive data mining tool that renders graphs for link 
analysis. The tool is used in online investigations for finding 
relationships between pieces of information from various 
sources located on the internet. 
19 

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 8 
APPENDIX A: METHODOLOGY  
The following steps were taken to complete the Master List requirement. 
1. The Mayor’s Office sent a City-wide email to notify City staff, department leaders, and privacy 
champions that the surveillance audit and inventory of technologies was required.  
2. The Chief Privacy Officer presented the process and timeline to City executives and leaders to 
request resources and cooperation. 
3. Privacy staff met with departments individually to discuss the overall process, discuss specific 
technologies, and make determinations about Master List technology inclusion.   
4. Privacy champions and staff were provided with the surveillance checklist (see below) to assist 
in identifying surveillance technologies that meet Surveillance Ordinance requirements.  
5. The list of technologies was validated against selection criteria and reviewed by the Chief 
Technology Officer prior to submission.  
 
 
  

 
2017 Surveillance Ordinance Master List | page 9 
APPENDIX B: SURVEILLANCE CRITERIA