TITLE: Surveillance Technology Usage Review: Automated License Plate Reader, Patrol (2021 and 2022)
PUBLISHER: Seattle Office of Inspector General
DATE: 2023
URL: https://www.seattle.gov/documents/departments/oig/audits/surveillancetechnologyusagereview-automatedlicenseplatereader-patrol(2021and2022).pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
As Required by Seattle Municipal Code 14.18.060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
September 29, 2023 
 
Office of Inspector General 
City of Seattle 
PO Box 94764 
Seattle, WA 98124-7064 
oig@seattle.gov 
(206) 684-3663 

 
 
 
1 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
 
Purpose 
 
Surveillance Ordinance Requirements 
Per Seattle Municipal Code 14.18.060, OIG is required to annually review the Seattle Police 
Department (SPD) use of surveillance technology to assess compliance with the 
requirements of Chapter 14.18.  
  
Non-Audit Statement  
This review was not conducted under Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards 
(GAGAS); however, OIG has followed GAGAS standards regarding the sufficiency and 
appropriateness of evidence.  
 
Table of Contents 
 
Executive Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  2 
Technology Description ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 4 
A.   2021 and 2022 Surveillance Technology Usage ................................ ................................ .... 5 
B.   Data Sharing with External Partners and Other Entities ................................ ......................  9 
C.   Data Management and Safeguarding of Individual Information ................................ ...... 10 
D.   Impact on Civil Liberties and Disproportionate Effects on Disadvantaged Populations 10 
E.   Complaints, Concerns and Other Assessments ................................ ................................ .. 15 
F.   Total Annual Costs ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 15 
 
 
Contents  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
 
 
2 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023  
 
 
 
The summary below highlights significant audit findings and recommendations regarding 
compliance with SMC 14.18.060.   
 
14.18.060 Provision Compliance 
Determination Auditor’s Findings         Recommendations 
A. How surveillance 
technology has 
been used, usage 
frequency, and 
whether usage 
patterns have 
changed. 
  
Yes  
 
Observed use of ALPR 
conformed to SPD policy 
on authorized and 
prohibited uses of ALPR. 
     No recommendations. 
B. How often 
surveillance 
technology or its 
data is shared 
with other 
entities, including 
government 
agencies.  
  
Needs Work 
  
Sharing of ALPR records 
in response to a Public 
Records Request did not 
adequately de-identify 
license plate numbers 
from locations and times 
they were scanned.  
     Recommendation 1 
     SPD should develop a process    
     for de-identifying ALPR  
     records released through  
     public disclosure, to the  
     extent allowable under the  
     Washington State Public  
     Records Act. 
C. How well data 
management 
protocols 
safeguard 
individual 
(personal) 
information. 
  
Yes 
 
Records are being purged 
after 90 days in 
accordance with the SIR.  
     No recommendations. 
Executive Summary 

 
 
 
3 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
14.18.060 Provision Compliance 
Determination Auditor’s Findings         Recommendations 
D. How deployment 
of surveillance 
technologies 
impacted or 
could impact civil 
liberties or have 
disproportionate 
effects on 
disadvantaged 
populations, and 
how those 
impacts are being 
mitigated. 
  
Needs Work 
  
Disproportionality in the 
collection of data creates 
risks, especially for 
historically marginalized 
communities, and East 
Precinct deployments are 
disproportionately high. 
 
SPD generally complied 
with policy to verify “hits” 
before acting. However, 
inaccurate or outdated 
information may still lead 
to erroneous vehicle 
stops. 
 
     Recommendation 2: 
     SPD should develop a  
     strategy for deployment of  
     ALPR-equipped vehicles that  
     takes disproportionality of  
     data collection into account. 
E. A summary of 
any complaints 
or concerns 
about the 
surveillance 
technology and 
results of 
internal audits or 
assessments of 
code 
compliance.  
  
Yes 
 
No complaints or 
concerns noted for 2021 
or 2022. 
     No recommendations. 
F. Total annual 
costs for use of 
surveillance 
technology, 
including 
personnel and 
other ongoing 
costs. 
  
Yes 
 
Maintenance and 
licensing costs were 
$3,395. 
     No recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
4 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023  
 
Technology Description 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scans are views of 
numbers captured 
by ALPR.  
  
A valid read is a 
scan of a license 
plate.   
  
Hotlist is a list of 
vehicles and license 
plates wanted in 
connection with 
crimes.   
  
Hit is a potential 
match between a 
valid read and an 
item on the hotlist.  
  
A misread is a valid 
read that initially 
registers as a hit but 
is a false positive. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Automated License Plate Reader (ALPR) surveillance technology is 
a high-definition, infrared digital camera system. SPD has this system 
installed in eleven SPD patrol cars. Each system has three mounted 
cameras, allowing for a greater field of vision. SPD policy and the SIR 
state that SPD utilizes ALPR-equipped patrol vehicles to locate and 
recover stolen vehicles and license plates, to identify vehicles wanted 
in conjunction with felonies, to enforce protective orders, and to 
canvass the area around a crime scene.  
  
ALPRs recognize and scan strings of letters and numbers as they come 
into view; however, not all scans are of license plates. The ALPR may 
scan numbers printed on the side of a vehicle or even a building. Valid 
reads are scans of letter and number series the ALPR system 
recognizes as license plate numbers. Whenever the ALPR system 
registers a valid read, it compares that read against items on a hotlist, 
sourcing license plate information from the Washington Crime 
Information Center, the FBI’s National Crime Information Center, 
Washington Department of Licensing, and SPD investigations. Both the 
hotlist and all scans are routed into a back-end system called Neology 
BOSS.  
  
Approximately 0.1% of valid reads are unverified “hits,” which are 
cases when the ALPR matches a license plate to a known item from the 
hotlist. Not all hits are true matches and require the officer to confirm. 
In some cases, the ALPR system may misread a digit (e.g., mistaking a 
“1” for an “I” or an “8” for a “B”). In other cases, the license plate 
contains the same digits as a known stolen vehicle but is from a 
different state.  For example, the ALPR may register a hit for the 
hypothetical license plate “1234 ABC.” In this scenario, the ALPR 
system indicates “1234 ABC” is from a stolen vehicle registered in 
Oregon; however, the plate read by the ALPR is from Washington 
state. The officer must visually confirm each hit by comparing the read 
and potential match to ensure that the digits and the issuing state 
match the hotlist record. When the officer confirms a match, the 
officer must verify it via radio dispatch or their mobile data computer 
(MDC) before taking any action.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
5 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A deployment is the 
unique instance 
where an officer (or 
two-officer team) 
signs into service on 
an ALPR-equipped 
patrol vehicle during 
a shift. 
 
Data Limitation 
SPD retains ALPR read and hit data for 90 days. Accordingly, data from 
deployments during this review period (2021 – 2022) had already been 
purged when this review began. SPD provided OIG with the ALPR 
Patrol Reads Statistics dataset, but these data were aggregated by day 
and could not be disaggregated to each deployment. As such, this 
review of 2021 and 2022 usage relies on Computer-Aided Dispatch 
(CAD) records to identify where and when ALPR-equipped vehicles 
were deployed over the review period.   
  
For the purposes of this report, OIG uses “deployment” to refer to the 
first time an officer (or two-officer team) signs into service on an ALPR-
equipped patrol vehicle during a shift; because officers may sign in 
multiple times during a single shift, OIG counted only the first sign in 
for each shift. This measurement is sufficient to provide a general 
picture of use but is not exact.  A vehicle may deploy to a certain sector 
or precinct but respond to events outside of that assigned area. 
Deployments also do not account for whether a vehicle is stationary or 
whether an officer has the ALPR system active while on patrol.1  
  
To improve future analyses, OIG is working with SPD on developing a 
means to capture de-identified data about ALPR hits and reads which 
may be preserved longer than 90 days.  
 
 
A.   2021 and 2022 Surveillance Technology Usage 
 
SMC 14.18.060, § A: 
How surveillance 
technology has 
been used, how 
frequently, and 
whether usage 
patterns are 
changing over time.  
 
 
 
 
 
In 2021 and 2022, SPD had eleven ALPR systems equipped to vehicles. 
These vehicles include ten marked patrol cars allocated to precincts, 
and an unmarked vehicle. The unmarked vehicle was assigned to an 
SPD Captain and used primarily for demonstrations of the ALPR 
system, training, and troubleshooting purposes. This Usage Review 
examines deployments of the ALPR-equipped marked patrol vehicles.  
 
 
 
 
 
1 Additionally, the same officer may sign into their vehicle multiple times in the same shift and in the same 
general location (i.e., the same or a different sector within the same precinct). OIG removed these duplicates 
and counted the number of unique deployment sign-ins for each day in the 2021 and 2022 review period. 

 
 
 
6 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
 
  
Patterns of Use Across Seattle  
SPD reported that ALPR-equipped vehicles are assigned to precincts 
based on the size of the jurisdiction; however, there is not a strategy or 
schedule for deployments within a given precinct. Use of the vehicles 
was described as first-come, first-serve for trained officers. This 
technology is used daily in a widespread manner in Seattle. Across the 
five precincts, SPD had at least three deployments every day in 2021 
and in 2022. In total, there were 3,561 and 3,330 deployments in 2021 
and 2022, respectively. 
 
Table 1: SPD’s ALPR Read Statistics, 2021 – 2022  
  
Year  Deployments  Total Scans  Valid Reads  Misreads  Hits  
2021  3,561  5,894,748  5,888,081  976  5,691  
2022  3,330  4,595,145  4,589,514  948  4,683  
 
 
Figure 1 depicts a scatterplot of all deployments of ALPR-equipped patrol vehicles. Each dot represents a 
date between January 1, 2021, and December 31, 2022, and the corresponding y-axis value depicts the 
number of deployments across all precincts for that date. The monthly average line indicates the rolling 
30-day average number of deployments. 

 
 
 
7 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Citywide deployment frequency of ALPR-equipped vehicles varied 
throughout the two-year review period. Over the course of multiple 
months, the average number of deployments followed an alternating 
pattern of increasing then decreasing and so on.  
 
Allocation of ALPR-Equipped Vehicles 
During the 2021 through 2022 review period, North Precinct had three 
ALPR-equipped vehicles, South and Southwest precincts had two 
vehicles each, and West Precinct had one vehicle. East Precinct had 
three vehicles in 2021 and two vehicles in 2022.  
 
 
Figure 2 depicts the distribution of overall deployments by precinct for 2021 and 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose of Use  
ALPR-equipped patrol cars identify vehicles associated with criminal 
activity or missing persons. SPD Policy 16.170-POL-2 General Policy 3 – 
Authorized and Prohibited Uses states: 
 
ALPR systems will only be deployed for official law enforcement purposes. 
These deployments are limited to:  
• Locating stolen vehicles;  
• Locating stolen license plates;  
• Locating wanted, endangered or missing persons; or those violating 
protection orders;  
• Canvassing the area around a crime scene;  
• Locating Vehicles under SCOFFLAW; and  

 
 
 
8 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
 
• Electronically chalking vehicles for parking enforcement purposes.  
 
[…] ALPR will not be used to intentionally capture images in a private area 
or areas where a reasonable expectation of privacy exists, nor shall it be 
used to harass, intimidate, or discriminate against any individual or 
group.  
 
To assess compliance with this policy, OIG identified 286 unique 
reports from both 2021 and 2022 that reference use of this technology 
and randomly selected 35% (100 reports) for review. Eighty-nine of the 
100 reports pertained to SPD ALPRs.2 In all eighty-nine cases involving 
SPD ALPRs, SPD use of this technology conformed to their purpose of 
use policy – see Figure 3 below.  
 
 
Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of ALPR purposes of use in a randomly selected sample of 89 reports 
from 2021 and 2022. 
 
  
 
2 OIG omitted eleven of the 100 cases because those cases involved Parking Enforcement ALPRs. 

 
 
 
9 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023  
 
B.   Data Sharing with External Partners and Other Entities 
 
SMC 14.18.060, § B: 
How often 
surveillance 
technology or its 
data are being 
shared with other 
entities, including 
other governments 
in particular.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCW 42.56.050 
protects against 
disclosure of 
information about a 
person is highly 
offensive or of no 
legitimate interest to 
the public. 
 
SPD reported it does not have a centralized method for sharing ALPR 
records with the entities listed below; therefore, it was not possible to 
assess how often SPD shared ALPR records with other government 
entities. However, Section 6 of the SIR allows SPD to share ALPR data 
with the following entities:  
 
• Seattle City Attorney’s Office   
• King County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office   
• King County Department of Public Defense   
• Private Defense Attorneys   
• Seattle Municipal Court   
• King County Superior Court   
• Similar entities where prosecution is in Federal or other State 
jurisdictions   
• Other law enforcement agencies   
• Insurance companies   
• Members of the public pursuant to the Washington Public 
Records Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW  
 
In 2021 and 2022, SPD received and responded to one public 
disclosure request for Patrol ALPR data, which resulted in SPD 
producing 93,497 individual records of valid reads, including license 
plate numbers, date, time, address, and zip code. 
In accordance with the spirit of RCW 42.56.050, SPD split the data into 
two documents: in one, license plate numbers were redacted while in 
the other, dates/times were redacted. Despite the redactions, placing 
the documents side-by-side allowed each license plate, location, and 
date/time to be associated. In this instance the requestor was an 
academic researcher, however future requests may come from 
entities seeking to use this expansive record of vehicle locations within 
the city in ways that impact civil liberties.3 
 
Recommendation 1: SPD should develop a process for de-identifying 
ALPR records released through public disclosure, to the extent 
allowable under the Washington State Public Records Act.  
 
 
3 ALPRs’ potential impacts on civil liberties are discussed further in Section D of this report. 

 
 
 
10 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
 
C.   Data Management and Safeguarding of Individual Information 
 
SMC 14.18.060, § C: 
How well data 
management 
protocols are 
safeguarding 
individual 
information.  
 
 
Data Retention  
Neology BOSS is the back-end system that stores all scans and hits 
from ALPR systems. This system is located on-premises in a datacenter 
located at the Seattle Justice Center. OIG found that SPD maintains this 
system in accordance with the SIR. BOSS automatically purges patrol 
ALPR data including scans and hits after 90 days.    
  
Authentication and Authorization   
Logins to the BOSS system are controlled with Active Directory Single 
Sign-On. Access is only possible from within the SPD internal network. 
To gain access to this network, the user must successfully complete a 
multi-factor authentication challenge requiring a physical token as a 
second factor.   
 
Backups   
Seattle ITD personnel responsible for system backups identified that 
the City IT department is backing up only the system and operating 
system configurations. The Neology BOSS database, which contains 
the actual records of reads and hits captured by patrol vehicles, are 
not backed up. This is necessary to avoid accidentally retaining data 
beyond the 90-day retention limit set in the SIR.  
 
  
D.   Impact on Civil Liberties and Disproportionate Effects on Disadvantaged 
Populations 
 
SMC 14.18.060, § D: 
How deployment of 
surveillance 
technologies 
impacted or could 
impact civil liberties 
or have  
disproportionate 
effects on 
disadvantaged 
populations […]. 
 
 
Potential Impacts on Civil Liberties  
Data collected by SPD ALPR systems constitute a limited record of 
vehicle locations within the city over a rolling 90-day period. The 
completeness of this record can be expected to vary based on how 
frequently a license plate is scanned by an ALPR. Thus, vehicles on a 
street frequently travelled by an ALPR-equipped car will be expected to 
have a higher incidence of scans stored in SPD systems. While license 
plates themselves are publicly viewable, they may be associated with a 
particular individual. Automated collection of such records at high  
 
 

 
 
 
11 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
volumes could result in a detailed log of a person’s movement 
throughout the city and create the potential for misuse. 
 
Potential Disproportionate Effects 
As noted in Section A of this review, SPD does not have a deployment 
strategy that takes historic over-policing into account. Accordingly, SPD 
does not take steps to ensure equivalent surveillance throughout the 
city by ALPR-equipped vehicles. 
 
Disproportionality of Deployments by Precinct  
As discussed in the Technology Description section of this report, 
disaggregated data on ALPR hits per deployment were not available 
for the period under review. Such data would provide the most 
accurate picture of any potential geographic disproportionality.4 In the 
absence of data capturing hits for each deployment, OIG compared 
the proportions of deployments to precinct size to understand 
whether the current allocation of ALPR-equipped vehicles creates 
disproportionate levels of surveillance between precincts. 
 
 
Figure 4 depicts the number of deployments per square mile in each precinct. Note: Figure 2 from Section 
A illustrates the total number of deployments per precinct, which results from the allocation of ALPR-
equipped patrol vehicles. The deployment rates shown in Figure 4 adjust those totals to account for the 
number of square miles in each precinct to estimate the likelihood of repeat scans. 
 
4 OIG is currently in the process of collecting data on the locations of ALPR hits for 2023 to better inform any 
future analysis and recommendations in this area. 

 
 
 
12 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Precincts vary greatly in geographic size but likely have a cumulative 
amount of roadway that is proportionate to its area in square miles. 
The East Precinct is geographically the smallest precinct and has the 
highest per-square mile deployment rate. This means that ALPR-
equipped patrol vehicles likely scanned a higher proportion of visible 
vehicles within the precinct and created more repeat-reads of the 
same vehicles on different days or from separate deployments relative 
to other precincts. Furthermore, East Precinct contains a high 
concentration of historically marginalized communities: approximately 
40% of East Precinct residents live in a census tract categorized by 
Seattle’s Race and Social Equity Index to be the highest or second 
highest equity priority. Additionally, Capitol Hill is a historic LGBTQIA+ 
neighborhood center.  
 
OIG did not observe misuse or improper sharing of ALPR data; 
however, disproportionality in data collection presents an ongoing risk 
to some disadvantaged populations. OIG recommends SPD take the 
following proactive steps to mitigate this risk in the future. 
 
Recommendation 2: SPD should develop a strategy for deployment of 
ALPR-equipped vehicles that takes disproportionality of data collection 
into account. 
 
Verification of Hit Accuracy Prior to Action  
While ALPR systems greatly expand the capabilities to identify 
potentially stolen vehicles and license plates, the systems also present 
risk of erroneously identifying vehicles and license plates that are not 
actually stolen. An additional risk for SPD ALPRs is not identifying the 
issuing state of a plate. Based on the annual summary statistics 
(shown in Table 1 in Section A), there was one misread for every five 
unverified hits recorded in 2021 and 2022.5 These risks are mitigated 
by SPD Policy requiring verification of a potential hit prior to action. 
SPD Policy 16.170-POL-2 General Policy 4 states: 
 
• ALPR operators will compare the digital image of the license to the 
Hotlist information to verify the Hit for both the state and 
characters on the plate.  
• ALPR operators will confirm the ALPR information by radio or 
Mobile Data Computer (MDC) to immediately confirm the Hit prior  
 
5 This is likely an undercount because officers do not always log all misreads appropriately.  

 
 
 
13 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to taking enforcement or other type of police action (absent exigent 
circumstances).  
• ALPR operators will enter a disposition for all ALPR Hits by selecting 
either “Accept” or “Misread” before removing the Hit from the 
computer screen.  
 
In the sample of 89 cases OIG reviewed, SPD officers complied with the 
verification policy 82 times. Officers double verified using both SPD 
radio dispatch and their MDC on 25 occasions. On four occasions in 
the sample, there was no evidence that a verification occurred prior to 
action.6 On two occasions, officers took no action, and on one 
occasion, officers acted prior to verification due to exigent 
circumstances, which conforms to SPD policy.7  
 
 
Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of verification methods ALPR-trained officers used from a sample of 
89 reports of incidents between 2021 and 2022. 
 
  
 
6 For cases not conforming to SPD policy, OIG reviewed the written narratives, CAD event logs, and body-worn 
video to assess conformance. 
7 In the case of exigent circumstances, an officer driving an ALPR-equipped patrol vehicle encountered a vehicle 
that returned an unverified hit for a stolen vehicle. Before the officer could verify the hit, the occupant of the 
vehicle drove away at a high speed. The officer disengaged pursuit after the occupant struck another vehicle. 

 
 
 
14 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023 
 
 
High Risk Vehicle 
Stops occur 
whenever an officer 
stops a vehicle on 
reasonable 
suspicion, probable 
cause, or a warrant 
and when such a 
stop may threaten 
the safety of the 
officer. 
Because the ALPR hotlist acquires criminal justice information from 
various sources, there will inevitably be a small number of 
administrative errors or outdated information automatically imported 
into ALPR systems. Though OIG observed a high rate of officers 
verifying hits prior to action, the risk of initiating high risk vehicle 
stops (HRVS) without proper justification still exists. In two incidents 
reviewed, SPD officers verified hits due to outdated or misleading 
hotlist information, which led to erroneous stops. 
 
In one instance, SPD officers verified an ALPR hit with dispatch, 
confirming that the license plate and vehicle matched that of a stolen 
vehicle. Officers conducted a stop of the vehicle with firearms drawn 
and detained the driver. Only after officers compared the VIN on the 
stopped vehicle with the VIN of the stolen vehicle, did they realize the 
stolen license plate had been swapped onto a car of the same make, 
model, and color. The detained driver complied with officers’ 
instructions throughout the incident but was visibly upset and 
confused by his detainment. Although he and his vehicle were 
released, he was still subject to the stress of a HRVS.  
 
In another instance, SPD officers stopped a pair of men in a parking lot 
following a stolen vehicle hit. Officers did not appear to validate the hit 
before initiating the stop in this case, but the hit was nonetheless 
accurate. Officers in this case did not draw their firearms or detain the 
subjects. The subjects explained that the vehicle had been stolen, but 
recently recovered and that recovery had not yet been reported. After 
investigation, the officers allowed the men to leave in their vehicle. 
 
Incidents like those described are rare and not attributable to the 
ALPR system, 911 dispatch, or responding officers. However, they 
highlight a risk that as ALPR greatly increases an officer’s ability to 
identify potentially stolen vehicles, it also increases the likelihood that 
upstream administrative issues or license plate swaps will result in 
vehicle stops that subject innocent individuals to significant risk. 
 
  

 
 
 
15 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
September 29, 2023  
 
E.   Complaints, Concerns and Other Assessments 
 
SMC 14.18.060, §  E: 
A summary of any 
complaints or 
concerns received 
by or known by 
departments about 
their surveillance 
technology and 
results of any 
internal audits or 
other assessments 
of code compliance . 
 
 
Office of Police Accountability (OPA) Complaints 
No complaints or concerns were submitted to OPA in 2021 or 2022.  
 
City of Seattle Customer Service Bureau Complaints 
No complaints were submitted to the City of Seattle Customer Service 
Bureau during 2021 or 2022.  
 
Internal Audits or Assessments 
No internal audits or assessments were conducted in 2021 or 2022. 
  
 
 
F.   Total Annual Costs 
 
SMC 14.18.060,  § F: 
Total annual costs 
for use of 
surveillance 
technology, 
including personnel 
and other ongoing 
costs. 
 
SPD reported that Seattle IT did not have cost records for 2021; 
however, in 2022, SPD recorded $3,395 in licensing costs for this 
technology. It was not feasible to calculate personnel costs for this 
technology for either year, given the high number of officers trained to 
operate ALPR-equipped vehicles and the number of deployments.   
 

 
 
Surveillance Technology Usage Review 
Automated License Plate Reader – Patrol (2021 and 2022) 
Recommendations Response 
 
1. SPD should develop a process for de-identifying ALPR records released through 
public disclosure, to the extent allowable under the Washington State Public 
Records Act. 
 
SPD Management Response 
☒ Concur ☐ Do Not Concur 
 
Estimated Date of Implementation: Q2 2024 
 
Proposed Implementation Plan: SPD will work with the City Attorney’s office to develop 
a process to respond to these requests in a way that complies with the law, and 
addresses this recommendation. 
 
 
 
2. SPD should develop a strategy for deployment of ALPR-equipped vehicles that 
takes disproportionality of data collection into account. 
 
SPD Management Response 
☒ Concur ☐ Do Not Concur 
 
Estimated Date of Implementation: 2025 
 
Proposed Implementation Plan: Establish a working group that incorporates DEI 
advisor to develop and then operationalize a strategy.