TITLE: 2023 Surveillance Impact Report: Fleet-Wide ALPR (with change markup)
PUBLISHER: City of Seattle
DATE: 2023
URL: https://www.seattle.gov/documents/Departments/Tech/Surveillance/Material%20Update%20Docs/ALPR/2023%20SIR%20Fleet-Wide%20ALPR%20with%20Change%20Markup.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage 
Negotiation Throw Phone |page i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2023 Surveillance Impact Report  
AUTOMATED LICENSE 
PLATE RECOGNITION 
(ALPR) (FLEET-WIDE) 
Seattle Police Department  
 
 
  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage 
Negotiation Throw Phone |page 2 
 
Upcoming 
for Review Initial Draft
Open 
Comment 
Period
Final Draft Working 
Group
Council 
Review
 
Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview 
About the Surveillance Ordinance 
The Seattle City Council passed Ordinance 125376, also referred to as the “Surveillance 
Ordinance,” on September 1, 2017. SMC 14.18.020.b.1 charges the City’s executive with 
developing a process to identify surveillance technologies subject to the ordinance. Seattle IT, 
on behalf of the executive, developed and implemented a process through which a privacy and 
surveillance review is completed prior to the acquisition of new technologies. This requirement, 
and the criteria used in the review process, are documented in Seattle IT Policy PR-02, the 
“Surveillance Policy”.  
How this Document is Completed 
This document is completed by the requesting department staff, support and coordinated by 
the Seattle Information Technology Department (“Seattle IT”). As Seattle IT and department 
staff complete the document, they should keep the following in mind. 
1. Responses to questions should be in the text or check boxes only; all other information 
(questions, descriptions, etc.) Should not be edited by the department staff completing 
this document.  
2. All content in this report will be available externally to the public. With this in mind, 
avoid using acronyms, slang, or other terms which may not be well-known to external 
audiences. Additionally, responses should be written using principally non-technical 
language to ensure they are accessible to audiences unfamiliar with the topic. 
Surveillance Ordinance Review Process 
The following is a high-level outline of the complete SIR review process. 
 
 
 
 
The technology is 
upcoming for 
review, but the 
department has 
not begun drafting 
the surveillance 
impact report 
(SIR). 
Work on the initial 
draft of the SIR is 
currently 
underway. 
The initial draft of 
the SIR and 
supporting 
materials have 
been released for 
public review and 
comment. During 
this time, one or 
more public 
meetings will take 
place to solicit 
feedback. 
During this stage 
the SIR, including 
collection of all 
public comments 
related to the 
specific 
technology, is 
being compiled 
and finalized. 
The surveillance 
advisory working 
group will review 
each SIR’s final 
draft and 
complete a civil 
liberties and 
privacy 
assessment, which 
will then be 
included with the 
City Council will 
decide on the use 
of the surveillance 
technology, by full 
Council vote. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage 
Negotiation Throw Phone |page 3 
 
SIR and submitted 
to Council. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 4 
 
Privacy Impact Assessment  
Purpose 
A Privacy Impact Assessment (“PIA”) is a method for collecting and documenting detailed 
information collected in order to conduct an in-depth privacy review of a program or project. A 
PIA asks questions about the collection, use, sharing, security and access controls for data that 
is gathered using a technology or program. It also requests information about policies, training 
and documentation that govern use of the technology. The PIA responses are used to 
determine privacy risks associated with a project and mitigations that may reduce some or all of 
those risks. In the interests of transparency about data collection and management, the City of 
Seattle has committed to publishing all PIAs on an outward facing website for public access.  
When is a Privacy Impact Assessment Required? 
A PIA may be required in two circumstances. 
1. When a project, technology, or other review has been flagged as having a high privacy 
risk.  
2. When a technology is required to complete the surveillance impact report process. This 
is one deliverable that comprises the report. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 5 
 
1.0 Abstract  
1.1 Please provide a brief description (one paragraph) of the purpose and proposed use of the 
project/technology. 
Seattle Police Department facilitates the flow of traffic (by monitoring and enforcing City 
parking restrictions) and recovers lost and stolen property through a number of means 
including Automated License Plate Reader (ALPR) technology.  ALPR is utilized in recovery of 
lost or stolen property, to assist with active investigations, Scofflaw Law enforcement, and 
parking enforcement. 
This Surveillance Impact Report focuses on SPD use of ALPR as a necessary law enforcement 
tool in two capacities: 
1. Property Recovery – SPD employs ALPR to locate stolen vehicles (usually 
abandoned), as well as other vehicles subject to search warrant. 
2. Investigation – On occasion, SPD relies on licenses plate reads to locate 
vehicle placement within the past 90 days (retention period), in the course 
of an active investigation or in support of legal proceedings.   
Note that ALPR usage for parking enforcement is discussed in the Surveillance Impact Report 
entitled “Parking Enforcement Systems.” 
1.2 Explain the reason the project/technology is being created or updated and why the PIA is 
required.  
 ALPR collects license plate information from vehicles, which could, if unregulated and 
indiscriminately used, be linked to other data to personally identify individuals.   
2.0 Project / Technology Overview 
Provide an overview of the project or technology. The overview gives the context and 
background necessary to understand the purpose, mission and justification for the project / 
technology proposed 
2.1 Describe the benefits of the project/technology. 
The benefit of ALPR is many-fold.  ALPR assists the City in managing flow of traffic (by 
monitoring and enforcing City parking restrictions) and locating and recovering lost/stolen 
property.  Additionally, the ALPR system aids with active investigations by helping to 
determine the location of vehicles of interest – specifically those that have been identified as 
being associated with an investigation or disposition.     
2.2 Provide any data or research demonstrating anticipated benefits. 
 General news reporting about ALPR Benefits: https://patch.com/california/glendora/plate-
reader-helps-police-find-stolen-cars-make-warrant-arrests 
 
 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 6 
 
2.3 Describe the technology involved. 
Fleet-wide ALPR for SPD Patrol operations is a component of the Axon Fleet 3 in-car video 
platform. 
The high-speed cameras capture images of license plates as they move into view, and 
associated software deciphers the characters on the plate, using optical character 
recognition.  This interpretation is then immediately checked against any license plate 
numbers that have been uploaded into the onboard, in-vehicle software system.  Twice a 
day, the License Plate Reader File (known as the HotList), a list of license plate numbers from 
Washington Crime Information Center (WACIC) and the FBI’s National Crime Information 
Center (NCIS), is uploaded into the ALPR system (via a connection to WACIC), which is a 
source of “hits” for the license plate reader system.  The license plate numbers compiled on 
the HotList “may be stolen vehicles, vehicles wanted in conjunction with felonies, wanted 
persons, and vehicles subject to seizure based on federal court orders” (WSP Memorandum 
of Understanding No. C141174GSC; March 11, 2014).  Other sources include the City of 
Seattle Municipal Court’s scofflaw list and content uploaded for over-time and metered 
parking enforcement (which are covered in the Parking Enforcement Systems SIR).  No ALPR 
data collected by SPD are automatically uploaded into any system outside of SPD.   
SPD contracts with Axon to provide both ALPR enabled in-car video hardware and software 
for the Fleet 3 Hub software system through which camera reads are interpreted and 
administrative control is managed.  This includes the ability to set and verify retention 
periods, track and log user activity, view camera “read” and “hit” data, and manage user 
permissions.    
The configuration is designed such that the cameras capture the images and filter the reads 
through the linked Fleet 3 Hub software to determine if/when a hit occurs.   
When the software identifies a hit, it issues an audible alert, and a visual notification informs 
the user which list the hit comes from – HotList; Scofflaw; time-restricted over time parking.   
A “HIT” triggers a chain of responses from the user that includes visual confirmation that the 
computer interpretation of the camera image is accurate, and the officer verbally checks with 
Dispatch for confirmation that the license plate is truly of interest before any action is taken.  
This is done to ensure the system accurately read a license plate.  When an inaccuracy is 
detected, users may choose to enter a note into the system that the “hit” was a misread.   
All data collected by the ALPR systems – images, computer-interpreted license plate 
numbers, date, time, and GPS location – are stored and retained for 90 days. After 90 days, 
all data collected by the ALPR systems is automatically deleted (unless it has been flagged as 
serving an investigative purpose – in which case, it is included in an investigation file).  
 
2.4 Describe how the project or use of technology relates to the department’s mission. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 7 
 
The mission of the Seattle Police Department is to prevent crime, enforce the law, and 
support quality public safety by delivering respectful, professional, and dependable police 
services. SPD’s department priorities include the use of best practices that include officer 
safety guidelines and performance-based accountability to provide progressive and 
responsive police services to crime victims, witnesses, and all members of the community, 
and to structure the organization to support the SPD mission and field a well-trained sworn 
and non-sworn workforce that uses technology, training, equipment, and research 
strategically and effectively. 
Seattle Police Department uses ALPR technology in its pursuit of maintaining public safety 
and enforcing applicable laws related to stolen vehicles and other crimes.   
2.5 Who will be involved with the deployment and use of the project / technology? 
All SPD vehicles with onboard in-car video will have ALPR functionality enabled. All sworn SPD 
officers will be trained in the use of the in-car video with ALPR enabled functionality.  
3.0 Use Governance  
Provide an outline of any rules that will govern the use of the project / technology. Please note: non-City 
entities contracting with the City are bound by restrictions specified in the surveillance ordinance and 
privacy principles and must provide written procedures for how the entity will comply with any 
restrictions identified. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 8 
 
3.1 Describe the processes that are required prior to each use, or access to/ of the project / 
technology, such as a notification, or check-in, check-out of equipment. 
Prior to gaining access to the ALPR system, potential users must be trained by other trained 
officers.  Once this training has been verified with the ALPR administrator, users are given 
access and must log into the system with unique login and password information whenever 
they employ the technology.  They remained logged into the system the entire time that the 
ALPR system is in operation.  The login is logged and auditable.   
Patrol Officers are assigned the vehicles to use while on-shift. 
3.2 List the legal standards or conditions, if any, that must be met before the project / 
technology is used.  
ALPR systems can be used during routine patrol or specific to a criminal investigation (i.e., to 
locate a stolen vehicle), as per SPD Policy 16.170. 
 
 The policy requires that users must be trained; they must be certified in A Central 
Computerized Enforcement Service System (ACCESS) – a computer controlled 
communications system maintained by Washington State Patrol that extracts data from 
multiple repositories, including Washington Crime Information Center, Washington State 
Identification System, the National Crime Information Center, the Department of Licensing, 
the Department of Corrections Offender File, the International Justice and Public Safety 
Network, and PARKS - and trained in the proper use of ALPR.  In addition, the policy limits use 
of the technology to strictly routine patrol or criminal investigation.  Further, the policy 
clarifies that users may only access ALPR data when that data relates to a specific criminal 
investigation.  A record of these requests is maintained by the ALPR administrator.   
 
3.3 Describe the policies and training required of all personnel operating the project / 
technology, and who has access to ensure compliance with use and management policies. 
SPD Policy 16.170 addresses Automatic License Plate Readers.  The policy requires that users 
must be trained; they must be certified in A Central Computerized Enforcement Service 
System (ACCESS) – a computer controlled communications system maintained by Washington 
State Patrol that extracts data from multiple repositories, including Washington Crime 
Information Center, Washington State Identification System, the National Crime Information 
Center, the Department of Licensing, the Department of Corrections Offender File, the 
International Justice and Public Safety Network, and PARKS - and trained in the proper use of 
ALPR.  In addition, the policy limits use of the technology to strictly routine patrol or criminal 
investigation.  Further, the policy clarifies that users may only access ALPR data when that 
data relates to a specific criminal investigation.  A record of these requests is maintained by 
the ALPR administrator.   
SPD’s Audit Unit monitors compliance for ALPR use for Patrol. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 9 
 
4.0 Data Collection and Use 
4.1 Provide details about what information is being collected from sources other than an 
individual, including other IT systems, systems of record, commercial data aggregators, 
publicly available data and/or other City departments. 
Data collected from ALPR include license plate image, computer-interpreted read of the 
license plate number, date, time, and GPS location.   
All ALPR-equipped vehicles upload a daily HotList that contains only license plate numbers, 
with the associated states, that are under active search warrant from NCIC and WASIC.  
4.2 What measures are in place to minimize inadvertent or improper collection of data? 
When the ALPR system registers a hit – a match to license plate number listed on the HotList 
(as described in 2.3 above) - the user must verify accuracy before taking any action.  For 
instance, when the system registers a hit on a stolen vehicle, the user must visually verify 
that the system accurately read the license plate and, if so, must then contact Dispatch to 
verify accuracy of the hit – that the vehicle is actually listed as stolen.  Only then does the 
user take action.  
Unless a hit has been flagged for investigation and exported from the database for this 
purpose, all captured data is automatically deleted after 90 days, per department retention 
policy.   
4.3 How and when will the project / technology be deployed or used? By whom? Who will 
determine when the project / technology is deployed and used? 
In-car video systems with enabled ALPR will be used in Patrol on a daily basis by authorized 
sworn users (see 2.5 above).   
4.4 How often will the technology be in operation?  
In-car video systems with enabled ALPR will be used in Patrol on a daily basis by authorized 
sworn users (see 2.5 above).   
4.5 What is the permanence of the installation? Is it installed permanently, or temporarily? 
Fleet-wide ALPR is a component of permanently installed in-car video. 
4.6 Is a physical object collecting data or images visible to the public? What are the markings 
to indicate that it is in use? What signage is used to determine department ownership and 
contact information? 
Fleet-wide ALPR is a component of permanently installed in-car video. Most SPD vehicles 
which have in-car video units installed are clearly marked as police vehicles. In-car video with 
enabled ALPR is installed in a few unmarked SPD vehicles which also have in-car video units. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 10 
 
4.7 How will data that is collected be accessed and by whom?  
Only authorized users can access the data collected by ALPR.  Per SPD Policy 16.170, 
authorized users must access the data only for active investigations and all activity by users in 
the system is logged and auditable.  SPD personnel within specific investigative units have 
access to ALPR data during its retention window of 90 days, during which time they can 
reference the data if it relates to a specific investigation.   
Data removed from the system/technology and entered into investigative files is securely 
input and used on SPD’s password-protected network with access limited to detectives and 
identified supervisory personnel. 
All SPD employees are backgrounded and access is controlled by SPD Manual Title 12 
provisions governing Department Information Systems including SPD Policy 12.040 - 
Department-Owned Computers, Devices & Software, SPD Policy 12.050 - Criminal Justice 
Information Systems, SPD Policy 12.080 – Department Records Access, Inspection & 
Dissemination, SPD Policy 12.110 – Use of Department E-mail & Internet Systems, and SPD 
Policy 12.111 – U se of Cloud Storage Services.  
 
4.8 If operated or used by another entity on behalf of the City, provide details about access, 
and applicable protocols.  
ALPR systems are operated and used only by SPD personnel.   
 
4.9 What are acceptable reasons for access to the equipment and/or data collected?  
Users can only access the equipment for purposes earlier outlined (see 1.0) – recovery of lost 
or stolen property, to assist with active investigations, Scofflaw Law enforcement, and 
parking enforcement.  Per SPD Policy 16.170, “ALPR may be used during routine patrol or any 
criminal investigation,” and users can access “ Patrol ALPR data only when the data relates to 
a specific criminal investigation.”   
4.10 What safeguards are in place, for protecting data from unauthorized access (encryption, 
access control mechanisms, etc.) And to provide an audit trail (viewer logging, modification 
logging, etc.)? 
Individuals can only access the ALPR system via unique login credentials.  Hardware systems 
can only be accessed in-vehicle. As previously noted, all activity in the system is logged and 
can be audited.   
SPD’s Audit Unit can conduct an audit of the any system at any time. The Office of Inspector 
General and the federal monitor can also access all data and audit for compliance at any 
time. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 11 
 
5.0 Data Storage, Retention and Deletion  
5.1 How will data be securely stored? 
All data collected from the ALPR system is stored, maintained, and managed in a CJIS 
certified evidence retention platform.  Retention is automated, such that unless a record is 
identified as being related to a criminal investigation and exported in support of that 
investigation, all ALPR data is deleted after 90 days.  No backup data is captured or retained.   
 
5.2 How will the owner allow for departmental and other entities, to audit for compliance 
with legal deletion requirements? 
SPD’s Audit Unit can conduct an audit of any SPD system at any time. In addition, the Office 
of Inspector General can access all data and audit for compliance at any time. 
SPD conducts periodic reviews of audit logs and they are available for review at any time by 
the Seattle Intelligence Ordinance Auditor under the City of Seattle Intelligence Ordinance. 
The software automatically alerts users of data that must be deleted under legal deletion 
requirements such as 28 CFR Part 23. 
5.3 What measures will be used to destroy improperly collected data?  
Once a license plate has been read, this data is automatically retained.  Any action taken at 
the scene as a result of a HotList hit can be contested by individuals.  Users may make notes 
in records about license plate data captured that reflects that the hit is a misread, or that the 
hit was in error.  The data unrelated to a specific investigation is retained for 90 days.   
 
5.4 which specific departmental unit or individual is responsible for ensuring compliance with 
data retention requirements?  
Seattle City IT, in conjunction with SPD’s ALPR administrator is responsible for ensuring 
compliance with data retention requirements.  Additionally, external audits by OIG and the 
Federal Monitor can review and ensure compliance, at any time.   
6.0 Data Sharing and Accuracy  
6.1 Which entity or entities inside and external to the City will be data sharing partners? 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 12 
 
SPD has no data sharing partners for ALPR.   No person, outside of SPD, has direct access to 
the PIPS system or the data while it resides in the system or technology.   
Data obtained from the system may be shared outside SPD with the other agencies, entities, 
or individuals within legal guidelines or as required by law. 
Data may be shared without outside entities in connection with criminal prosecutions:  
• Seattle City Attorney’s Office 
• King County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office 
• King County Department of Public Defense 
• Private Defense Attorneys 
• Seattle Municipal Court 
• King County Superior Court 
• Similar entities where prosecution is in Federal or other State jurisdictions 
 
Data may be made available to requesters pursuant to the Washington Public Records Act, 
Chapter 42.56 RCW (“PRA”). SPD will apply applicable exemptions to the data before 
disclosing to a requester.  Individuals have the right to inspect criminal history record 
information maintained by the department (RCW 10.97.030, SPD Policy 12.050). Individuals can 
access their own information by submitting a public disclosure request. 
 
Per SPD Policy 12.080, the Crime Records Unit is responsible for receiving, recording, and 
responding to requests “for General Offense Reports from other City departments and from 
other law enforcement agencies, as well as from insurance companies.”   
Discrete pieces of data collected by the ALPR may be shared with other law enforcement agencies in 
wanted bulletins, and in connection with law enforcement investigations jointly conducted with those 
agencies, or in response to requests from law enforcement agencies investigating criminal activity as 
governed by SPD Policy 12.050 and 12.110.  All requests for data from Federal Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) authorities are referred to the Mayor’s Office Legal Counsel in accordance 
with the Mayoral Directive, dated February 6, 2018. 
 
SPD shares data with authorized researchers pursuant to properly execute research and 
confidentiality agreements as provide by SPD Policy 12.055.  This sharing may include 
discrete pieces of data related to specific investigative files collected by the ALPR system.   
 
6.2 Why is data sharing necessary? 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 13 
 
Data sharing is frequently necessary during the course of a criminal investigation to follow up 
on leads and gather information on suspects from outside law enforcement agencies. 
Cooperation between law enforcement agencies is an essential part of the investigative 
process. 
Products developed using this information may be shared with other law enforcement 
agencies. All products created with the information used in this project will be classified as 
Law Enforcement Sensitive. Any bulletins will be marked with the following restrictions: LAW 
ENFORCEMENT SENSITIVE — DO NOT LEAVE PRINTED COPIES UNATTENDED — DISPOSE OF 
IN SHREDDER ONLY – NOT FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY OR DISTRIBUTION — DO NOT FORWARD OR 
COPY. 
6.3 Are there any restrictions on non-City data use?  
Yes ☒ No ☐ 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 14 
 
6.3.1 If you answered yes, provide a copy of the department’s procedures and policies for 
ensuring compliance with these restrictions. 
Law enforcement agencies receiving criminal history information are subject to the 
requirements of 28 CFR Part 20. In addition, Washington State law enforcement 
agencies  are subject to the provisions of WAC 446-20-260, and RCW Chapter 10.97. 
Once disclosed in response to PRA request, there are no restrictions on non-City data 
use; however, applicable exemptions will be applied prior to disclosure to any 
requestor who is not authorized to receive exempt content.   
6.4 How does the project/technology review and approve information sharing agreements, 
memorandums of understanding, new uses of the information, new access to the system by 
organizations within City of Seattle and outside agencies?  
Research agreements must meet the standards reflected in SPD Policy 12.055. Law 
enforcement agencies receiving criminal history information are subject to the requirements 
of 28 CFR Part 20. In addition, Washington State law enforcement agencies are subject to the 
provisions of WAC 446-20-260, and RCW Chapter 10.97. 
Following Council approval of the SIR, SPD must seek Council approval for any material 
change to the purpose or manner in which the [system or technology] may be used. 
6.5 Explain how the project/technology checks the accuracy of the information collected. If 
accuracy is not checked, please explain why. 
System users are trained to visually verify accuracy, comparing a license plate hit to the 
physical plate/vehicle that the system read before taking any action.  If they note a misread, 
they can enter a note into the system recognizing the read, as such.  If they cannot verify 
visually, no action is taken.     
6.6 Describe any procedures that allow individuals to access their information and correct 
inaccurate or erroneous information. 
Individuals may request records pursuant to the PRA, and individuals have the right to inspect 
criminal history record information maintained by the department (RCW 10.97.030, SPD Policy 
12.050). Individuals can access their own information by submitting a public disclosure request 
7.0 Legal Obligations, Risks and Compliance 
7.1 What specific legal authorities and/or agreements permit and define the collection of 
information by the project/technology? 
ALPR use is not legally constrained at the local, state, or federal level.  Instead, retention of 
data is restricted.  SPD retains license plate data that is not case specific (i.e., related to an 
investigation) for 90 days.   
Case specific data is maintained for the retention period applicable to the specific case type.   

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 15 
 
7.2 Describe what privacy training is provided to users either generally or specifically relevant 
to the project/technology. 
SPD Policy 12.050 mandates that all employees receive Security Awareness Training (Level 2), and 
all employees also receive City Privacy Training. All SPD employees must adhere to laws, City 
policy, and Department Policy (SPD Policy 5.001), many of which contain specific privacy 
requirements. Any employees suspected of being in violation of laws or policy or other 
misconduct are subject to discipline, as outlined in SPD Policy 5.002.   
7.3 Given the specific data elements collected, describe the privacy risks identified and for 
each risk, explain how it was mitigated. Specific risks may be inherent in the sources or 
methods of collection, or the quality or quantity of information included. 
Each component of data collected, on its own, does not pose a privacy risk.  Paired with other 
known or auditable information, however, an individual may be able to personally identify 
owners of vehicles, and then use that information to determine, to a certain degree, where 
specific vehicles have been located.  Because SPD’s fleet-wide ALPR cameras are not fixed in 
location and records are only retained for 90 days, privacy risk is substantially mitigated 
because of the limited ability to identify vehicle patterns.   
Per SPD Policy 16.170, general users of ALPR are restricted from accessing the data, except as 
it relates to a specific criminal investigation.  Any activity by a user to access this information 
is logged and auditable.  The PRA requires release of collected ALPR data, however, making it 
possible for members of the general public to make those identification connections on their 
own if they have access to the information necessary to do so, such as an independent 
knowledge of a particular individual’s license plate number.    
 
7.4 Is there any aspect of the project/technology that might cause concern by giving the 
appearance to the public of privacy intrusion or misuse of personal information?  
As mentioned in 7.3, the data could be used to personally identify individuals; however, SPD 
policy prohibits the use of data collected by ALPR to be used in any capacity beyond its 
relation to a specific criminal investigation or parking enforcement action.  Additionally, all 
collected data that is not relevant to an active investigation is deleted after 90 days of 
collection.   
8.0 Monitoring and Enforcement 
8.1 Describe how the project/technology maintains a record of any disclosures outside of the 
department. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation 
Throw Phone |page 16 
 
Data collected by ALPR is only disclosed pursuant to the public under the PRA.  The only data 
available for disclosure is that data which remains in the system within the 90-day retention 
window.   
Per SPD Policy 12.080, the Crime Records Unit is responsible to receive and record all 
requests “for General Offense Reports from other City departments and from other law 
enforcement agencies, as well as from insurance companies.”   
Any requests for disclosure are logged by SPD’s Public Disclosure Unit.  Any action taken, and 
data released subsequently, is then tracked through the request log.  Responses to Public 
Disclosure Requests, including responsive records provided to a requestor, are retained by 
SPD for two years after the request is completed.   
8.2 What auditing measures are in place to safeguard the information, and policies that 
pertain to them, as well as who has access to the audit data? Explain whether the 
project/technology conducts self-audits, third party audits or reviews. 
The ALPR system does not self-audit.  Instead, third party audits exist, as follows: 1) The ALPR 
administrator has the responsibility of managing the user list and ensuring proper access to 
the system; 2) The Federal Monitor can conduct an audit at any time; and 3) the OIG can also 
conduct an audit.  Violations of policy may result in referral to Office of Professional 
Accountability (OPA). 
SPD’s Audit Unit personnel can also conduct audits of all data collection software and systems. 
Additionally, any appropriate auditor, including the Office of Inspector General and the federal 
monitor can audit for compliance at any time.    
 
  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Financial Information | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw 
Phone |page 17 
 
Financial Information 
Purpose 
This section provides a description of the fiscal impact of the surveillance technology, as 
required by the surveillance ordinance. 
1.0 Fiscal Impact 
Provide a description of the fiscal impact of the project/technology by answering the questions 
below.  
1.1 Current or potential sources of funding: initial acquisition costs. 
Current ☒ potential ☐ 
Date of initial 
acquisition 
Date of go 
live 
Direct initial 
acquisition 
cost 
Professional 
services for 
acquisition 
Other 
acquisition 
costs 
Initial 
acquisition 
funding 
source 
      
      
Notes: 
 
1.2 Current or potential sources of funding: on-going operating costs, including maintenance, 
licensing, personnel, legal/compliance use auditing, data retention and security costs. 
Current ☐ potential ☐ 
Annual 
maintenance and 
licensing  
Legal/compliance, 
audit, data 
retention and 
other security 
costs 
Department 
overhead 
IT overhead Annual funding 
source 
     
Notes: 
Respond to question 7.3 here 
1.3 Cost savings potential through use of the technology 
Respond to question 1.3 here 
1.4 Current or potential sources of funding including subsidies or free products offered by 
vendors or governmental entities 
Seattle Police Foundation Grant  
 
  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Expertise and References | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw 
Phone |page 18 
 
Expertise and References  
Purpose 
The following information is provided to ensure that Council has a group of experts to reference 
while reviewing the completed surveillance impact report (“SIR”). Any individuals or agencies 
referenced must be made aware ahead of publication that their information has been included. 
All materials must be available for Council to access or review, without requiring additional 
purchase or contract. 
1.0 Other Government References 
Please list any other government bodies that have implemented this technology and can speak 
to the implementation of this technology. 
Agency, municipality, etc. Primary contact Description of current use 
Washington State Patrol  
 
   
   
2.0 Academics, Consultants, and Other Experts 
Please list any experts in the technology under consideration, or in the technical completion of the 
service or function the technology is responsible for.   
Agency, municipality, etc. Primary contact Description of current use 
Bryce Newell, PhD Brycenewell@uky.edu  “Transparent Lives and the 
Surveillance State: Policing, 
New Visibility, and 
Information Policy” – A 
Dissertation     
3.0 White Papers or Other Documents 
Please list any authoritive publication, report or guide that is relevant to the use of this technology or 
this type of technology.  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Expertise and References | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw 
Phone |page 19 
 
Automated 
License Plate 
Recognition 
Systems: 
Policy and 
Operational 
Guidance for 
Law 
Enforcement 
 
 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/239604.pdf 
 
   
 
  
US Department 
of Justice 
(federally-
funded grant 
report) 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 20 
 
Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public 
comment worksheet 
Purpose 
Departments submitting a SIR are required to complete an adapted version of the Racial Equity 
Toolkit (“RET”) in order to: 
• Provide a framework for the mindful completion of the SIR in a way that is sensitive to 
the historic exclusion of vulnerable and historically underrepresented communities. 
Particularly, to inform the public engagement efforts departments will complete as part 
of the surveillance impact report. 
• Highlight and mitigate any impacts on racial equity from the adoption and the use of the 
technology. 
• Highlight and mitigate any disparate impacts on individuals or vulnerable communities.   
• Fulfill the public engagement requirements of the surveillance impact report. 
Adaptation of the RET for Surveillance Impact Reports 
The RET was adapted for the specific use by the Seattle Information Technology Departments’ 
(“Seattle IT”) Privacy Team, the Office of Civil Rights (“OCR”), and Change Team members from 
Seattle IT, Seattle City Light, Seattle Fire Department, Seattle Police Department, and Seattle 
Department of Transportation. 
Racial Equity Toolkit Overview 
The vision of the Seattle Race and Social Justice Initiative (“RSJI”) is to eliminate racial inequity 
in the community. To do this requires ending individual racism, institutional racism and 
structural racism. The RET lays out a process and a set of questions to guide the development, 
implementation and evaluation of policies, initiatives, programs, and budget issues to address 
the impacts on racial equity.  
1.0 Set Outcomes 
1.1. Seattle City Council has defined the following inclusion criteria in the surveillance 
ordinance, and they serve as important touchstones for the risks departments are being 
asked to resolve and/or mitigate. Which of the following inclusion criteria apply to this 
technology? 
☐ The technology disparately impacts disadvantaged groups.  
☐ There is a high likelihood that personally identifiable information will be shared with non-City 
entities that will use the data for a purpose other than providing the City with a contractually 
agreed-upon service.  
☐ The technology collects data that is personally identifiable even if obscured, de-identified, or 
anonymized after collection.  
☐ The technology raises reasonable concerns about impacts to civil liberty, freedom of speech 
or association, racial equity, or social justice. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 21 
 
1.2 What are the potential impacts on civil liberties through the implementation of this 
technology? How is the department mitigating these risks? 
 Without appropriate policy, license plate data could be 
paired with other identifiable information about individuals 
that could be used to identify individuals without reasonable 
suspicion of having committed a crime, or to data mine for 
information that is not incidental to any active investigation.  
SPD Policy 16.170 mitigates this concern by limiting 
operation to solely routine patrol or criminal investigation.     
 
1.3 What are the risks for racial or ethnicity-based bias through each use or deployment of 
this technology? How is the department mitigating these risks? 
Include a description of any issues that may arise such as algorithmic bias or the possibility for 
ethnic bias to emerge in people and/or system decision-making.  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 22 
 
Trust in SPD is impacted by its treatment of all individuals.  Equity in treatment, regardless of 
actual or perceived race, gender, sex, sexual orientation, country of origin, religion, ethnicity, 
age, and ability is critical to establishing and maintaining trust.   
Per the 2016 Race and Social Justice Initiative Community Survey, measuring “the 
perspectives of those who live, work, and go to school in Seattle, including satisfaction with 
City services, neighborhood quality, housing affordability, feelings about the state of racial 
equity in the city, and the role of government in addressing racial inequities,” 56.1% of 
African American/Black respondents, 47.3% of Multiracial respondents, and 47% of 
Indian/Alaska Native respondents have little to no confidence in the police to do a good job 
enforcing the law, as compared with 31.5% of White respondents.  Further, while 54.9% of 
people of color have a great deal or fair amount of confidence in the police to treat people of 
color and White people equally, 45.1% of people of color have little to no confidence in the 
police to treat people equitably.  This is contrasted with White respondents, of which 67.5% 
have a great deal or fair amount of confidence in the police to treat people of color and 
White people equally.  This may be rooted in feelings of disparate types of contact with the 
police, across racial groups.  While 14.3% of White respondents, 14.7% of Asian/Pacific 
Islander respondents, and 16.7% of Latino/Hispanic respondents reported being questioned 
by the police, charged, or arrested when they had not committed a crime, some communities 
of color reported much higher rates (American Indian/Alaska Native -52.7%; Black/African 
American - 46.8%; and Multiracial - 36.8%) of this type of contact with the criminal justice 
system.       
As it relates to ALPR, it is important that SPD continue to follow its policy of limiting use of 
the technology to strictly routine patrol or criminal investigation, as well as limiting access to 
ALPR data to only instances in which it relates to a specific criminal investigation.  Further, 
continuing to audit the system on a regular basis, provides a measure of accountability.  In 
doing so, SPD can mitigate the appearance of disparate treatment of individuals based on 
factors other than true criminal activity.         
 
1.4 Where in the City is the technology used or deployed?  
☒ all Seattle neighborhoods 
☐ Ballard 
☐ Belltown 
☐ Beacon Hill 
☐ Capitol Hill 
☐ Central District 
☐ Columbia City 
☐ Delridge 
☐ First Hill 
☐ Georgetown 
☐ Greenwood / Phinney 
☐ Northwest 
☐ Madison Park / Madison Valley 
☐ Magnolia 
☐ Rainier Beach 
☐ Ravenna / Laurelhurst 
☐ South Lake Union / Eastlake 
☐ Southeast 
☐ Southwest 
☐ South Park 
☐ Wallingford / Fremont 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 23 
 
☐ International District 
☐ Interbay 
☐ North 
☐ Northeast 
☐ West Seattle 
☒ King county (outside Seattle) (Mutual 
Aid) 
☒ Outside King County (Mutual Aid) 
 
If possible, please include any maps or visualizations of historical deployments / use. 
If possible, please include any maps or visualizations of historical deployments / use 
here. 
 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 24 
 
1.4.1 What are the racial demographics of those living in this area or impacted by 
these issues? 
City of Seattle demographics: White - 69.5%; Black or African American - 7.9%; Amer. 
Indian & Alaska Native - 0.8%; Asian - 13.8%; Native Hawaiian & Pacific Islander - 0.4; 
Other race - 2.4%; Two or more races - 5.1%; Hispanic or Latino ethnicity (of any race): 
6.6%; Persons of color: 33.7%. 
King County demographics: White – 70.1%; Black or African American – 6.7%; 
American Indian & Alaskan Native – 1.1%; Asian, Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander – 
17.2%; Hispanic or Latino (of any race) – 9.4% 
1.4.2 How does the Department to ensure diverse neighborhoods, communities, or 
individuals are not specifically targeted through the use or deployment of this 
technology?  
Per SPD Policy 16.170, “Before employees operate the ALPR system or access ALPR 
data, they will complete Department training on the proper and lawful use of the 
system.” SPD Policy 5.140 forbids bias-based policing and outlines processes for 
reporting and documenting any suspected bias-based behavior, as well as 
accountability measures. 
Also, by equipping all in-car video throughout the department with ALPR, deployment 
of this system becomes non-discretionary. When ALPR is deployed based on where 
calls for police service are, implicit biases are removed from consideration in this 
regard.  
1.5 How do decisions around data sharing have the potential for disparate impact on 
historically targeted communities? What is the department doing to mitigate those risks?  
Historically targeted communities have often been denied the same opportunities for 
information privacy as the majority populations. Data sharing has the potential to 
be a contributing factor to structural racism and thus creating a disparate impact on 
historically targeted communities. In an effort to mitigate this possibility, SPD has established 
policies regarding the dissemination of data in connection with criminal prosecutions, 
Washington Public Records Act (Chapter 42.56 RCW), and other authorized researchers. 
Further, SPD Policy 5.140 forbids bias-based policing and outlines processes for reporting and 
documenting any suspected bias-based behavior, as well as accountability measures. 
 
1.6 How do decisions around data storage and retention have the potential for disparate 
impact on historically targeted communities? What is the department doing to mitigate those 
risks?  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 25 
 
As with decisions around data sharing, data storage and retention have similar potential for 
disparate impact on historically targeted communities. 
Further, SPD Policy 5.140 forbids bias-based policing and outlines processes for reporting and 
documenting any suspected bias-based behavior, as well as accountability measures. 
1.7 What are potential unintended consequences (both negative and positive potential 
impact)? What proactive steps can you can / have you taken to ensure these consequences 
do not occur. 
Without appropriate policy, license plate data could be paired with other identifiable 
information about individuals that could be used to identify individuals without reasonable 
suspicion of having committed a crime, or to data mine for information that is not incidental 
to any active investigation.  SPD Policy 16.170 mitigates this concern by limiting operation to 
solely routine patrol or criminal investigation.  90-day data retention also mitigates the risk 
of improper identification of community members.  
2.0 Public Outreach  
2.1 Organizations who received a personal invitation to participate.  
Please include a list of all organizations specifically invited to provide feedback on this 
technology. 
1. Date 2.  3.  
2.1 Scheduled public meeting(s). 
Meeting notes, sign-in sheets, all comments received, and questions from the public will be 
included in Appendix B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I. Comment analysis will be summarized in section 
3.0 Public Comment Analysis. 
Location  
Time  
Capacity  
Link to URL Invite  
2.2 Scheduled focus Group Meeting(s) 
Meeting 1 
Community 
Engaged 
 
Date  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 26 
 
Meeting 2 
Community 
Engaged 
 
Date  
3.0 Public Comment Analysis 
This section will be completed after the public comment period has been completed on [DATE] 
by Privacy Office staff. 
3.1 Summary of Response Volume 
Dashboard of respondent demographics. 
3.2 Question One: What concerns, if any, do you have about the use of this technology? 
Dashboard of respondent demographics. 
3.3 Question Two: What value, if any, do you see in the use of this technology? 
Dashboard of respondent demographics. 
3.4 Question Three: What would you want City leadership to consider when making a 
decision about the use of this technology? 
Dashboard of respondent demographics. 
3.5 Question Four: General response to the technology. 
Dashboard of respondent demographics. 
3.5 General Surveillance Comments  
These are comments received that are not particular to any technology currently under review. 
Dashboard of respondent demographics. 
4.0 Response to Public Comments 
This section will be completed after the public comment period has been completed on [DATE]. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw Phone |page 27 
 
4.1 How will you address the concerns that have been identified by the public?  
What program, policy and partnership strategies will you implement? What strategies 
address immediate impacts? Long-term impacts? What strategies address root causes of 
inequity listed above? How will you partner with stakeholders for long-term positive 
change?  
5.0 Equity Annual Reporting  
5.1 What metrics for this technology be reported to the CTO for the annual equity 
assessments?  
Respond here.   
  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage 
Negotiation Throw Phone |page 28 
 
Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment 
Purpose 
This section shall be completed after public engagement has concluded and the department has 
completed the racial equity toolkit section above. The privacy and civil liberties assessment is completed 
by the community surveillance working group (“working group”), per the surveillance ordinance which 
states that the working group shall: 
“Provide to the executive and the City Council a privacy and civil liberties impact assessment for each SIR 
that must be included with any departmental request for surveillance technology acquisition or in-use 
approval. The impact assessment shall include a description of the potential impact of the surveillance 
technology on civil rights and liberties and potential disparate impacts on communities of color and 
other marginalized communities. The CTO shall share with the working group a copy of the SIR that shall 
also be posted during the period of public engagement. At the conclusion of the public engagement 
period, the CTO shall share the final proposed SIR with the working group at least six weeks prior to 
submittal of the SIR to Council for approval. The working group shall provide its impact assessment in 
writing to the executive and the City Council for inclusion in the SIR within six weeks of receiving the 
final proposed SIR. If the working group does not provide the impact assessment before such time, the 
working group must ask for a two-week extension of time to City Council in writing.   If the working 
group fails to submit an impact statement within eight weeks of receiving the SIR, the department and 
City Council may proceed with ordinance approval without the impact statement.” 
Working Group Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment 
Respond here.  
 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Submitting Department Response | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage 
Negotiation Throw Phone |page 29 
 
Submitting Department Response 
Description  
Provide the high-level description of the technology, including whether software or hardware, 
who uses it and where/when.  
Purpose  
State the reasons for the use cases for this technology; how it helps meet the departmental 
mission; benefits to personnel and the public; under what ordinance or law it is used/mandated 
or required; risks to mission or public if this technology were not available.   
Benefits to the Public  
Provide technology benefit information, including those that affect departmental personnel, 
members of the public and the City in general.  
Privacy and Civil Liberties Considerations  
Provide an overview of the privacy and civil liberties concerns that have been raised over the 
use or potential mis-use of the technology; include real and perceived concerns.  
Summary  
Provide summary of reasons for technology use; benefits; and privacy considerations and how 
we are incorporating those concerns into our operational plans.  
 
  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix A: Glossary | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw 
Phone |page 30 
 
Appendix A: Glossary 
Accountable: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Responsive to the needs and concerns of those most 
impacted by the issues you are working on, particularly to communities of color and those historically 
underrepresented in the civic process. 
Community outcomes: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) The specific result you are seeking to 
achieve that advances racial equity. 
Contracting equity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Efforts to achieve equitable racial outcomes in 
the way the City spends resources, including goods and services, consultants and contracting. 
DON: “department of neighborhoods.”  
Immigrant and refugee access to services: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Government services 
and resources are easily available and understandable to all Seattle residents, including non-native 
English speakers. Full and active participation of immigrant and refugee communities exists in Seattle’s 
civic, economic and cultural life. 
Inclusive outreach and public engagement: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Processes inclusive of 
people of diverse races, cultures, gender identities, sexual orientations and socio-economic status. 
Access to information, resources and civic processes so community members can effectively engage in 
the design and delivery of public services. 
Individual racism: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Pre-judgment, bias, stereotypes about an 
individual or group based on race. The impacts of racism on individuals including white people 
internalizing privilege, and people of color internalizing oppression. 
Institutional racism: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Organizational programs, policies or 
procedures that work to the benefit of white people and to the detriment of people of color, usually 
unintentionally or inadvertently. 
OCR: “Office of Civil Rights.” 
Opportunity areas: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) One of seven issue areas the City of Seattle is 
working on in partnership with the community to eliminate racial disparities and create racial equity. 
They include: education, health, community development, criminal justice, jobs, housing, and the 
environment. 
Racial equity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) When social, economic and political opportunities 
are not predicted based upon a person’s race. 

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix A: Glossary | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage Negotiation Throw 
Phone |page 31 
 
Racial inequity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) When 
a person’s race can predict their social, economic, and 
political opportunities and outcomes. 
RET: “racial equity toolkit” 
Seattle neighborhoods: (taken from the racial equity toolkit 
neighborhood.) Boundaries defined for the purpose of 
understanding geographic areas in Seattle. 
Stakeholders: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Those 
impacted by proposed policy, program, or budget issue who 
have potential concerns or issue expertise. Examples might 
include: specific racial/ethnic groups, other institutions like 
Seattle housing authority, schools, community-based 
organizations, change teams, City employees, unions, etc. 
Structural racism: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) The 
interplay of policies, practices and programs of multiple 
institutions which leads to adverse outcomes and conditions 
for communities of color compared to white communities 
that occurs within the context of racialized historical and 
cultural conditions. 
Surveillance ordinance: Seattle City Council passed 
ordinance 125376, also referred to as the “surveillance 
ordinance.” 
SIR: “surveillance impact report”, a document which captures the fulfillment of the Council-defined 
surveillance technology review process, as required by ordinance 125376.  
Workforce equity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Ensure the City's workforce diversity reflects 
the diversity of Seattle. 
  

 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Hostage 
Negotiation Throw Phone |page 32 
 
Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis 
Appendix C: Public Comment Demographics 
Appendix D: Comment Analysis Methodology 
Appendix E: Questions and Department Responses 
Appendix F: Public Outreach Overview 
Appendix G: Meeting Notice(s) 
Appendix H: Meeting Sign-in Sheet(s) 
Appendix I: All Comments Received from Members of the 
Public 
Appendix J: Letters from Organizations or Commissions  
Appendix K: Supporting Policy Documentation 
Appendix L: CTO Notification of Surveillance Technology