TITLE: Seattle Ordinance 127044 - SPD Fleet-Wide ALPR Surveillance Impact Report
PUBLISHER: Seattle City Clerk
DATE: 2024
URL: https://clerk.seattle.gov/~archives/Ordinances/Ord_127044.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-28
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Nick Zajchowski / Tamaso Johnson 
SPD ALPR Fleet-Wide Update SIR ORD 
D3 
Template last revised December 13,, 2022 1 
CITY OF SEATTLE 1 
ORDINANCE __________________ 2 
COUNCIL BILL __________________ 3 
 4 
AN ORDINANCE relating to surveillance technology implementation; authorizing approval of 5 
uses and accepting the 2023 updated surveillance impact report and 2023 executive 6 
overview for the Seattle Police Department’s use of Automated License Plate Reader 7 
technology. 8 
 9 
WHEREAS, on April 19, 2021, the City Council passed Ordinance 126312, adopting the original 10 
Surveillance Impact Report (SIR) for the Automated License Plate Reader (ALPR) 11 
technology; and 12 
WHEREAS, subsection 14.18.020.F of the Seattle Municipal Code (SMC), enacted by 13 
Ordinance 125376 and last amended by Ordinance 125679, states that "[a]ny material 14 
update to an SIR, such as to change the purpose or manner in which a surveillance 15 
technology may be used, shall be by ordinance"; and 16 
WHEREAS, City departments have engaged the Seattle Information Technology Department 17 
(Seattle IT) regarding potential changes in their technologies that have occurred since the 18 
original SIRs were passed by the Council; and  19 
WHEREAS, ensuring compliance now requires operationalizing a defined process for 20 
submission of updated SIRs reflecting the material updates; and 21 
WHEREAS, Seattle IT has worked with stakeholders including Council Central Staff, the Office 22 
of the Inspector General (OIG), City Auditor’s Office, City Attorney’s Office, and others 23 
to develop a working definition of “Material Update” and this is reflected in the Seattle 24 
IT POL-203 Surveillance Policy updates, finalized at the end of 2022; and 25 
WHEREAS, material updates include new capabilities and uses of the technology, not included 26 
in the SIR approved by the Council, and are evaluated with consideration of the 27 
120778
127044

Nick Zajchowski / Tamaso Johnson 
SPD ALPR Fleet-Wide Update SIR ORD 
D3 
Template last revised December 13,, 2022 2 
following categories — 1) Purpose: The specific purpose(s) for the surveillance 1 
technology, 2) Functionality: The type of operations that can be run on the surveillance 2 
technology, 3) Allowable Uses: Authorized uses, the rules and processes required before 3 
that use, and uses that are prohibited, 4) Surveillance Data: Expanded scope of data 4 
collected or data processing activities associated with the technology (including changes 5 
in data sharing), 5) Data Retention: What data is retained and for how long; includes 6 
changes in the storage of data, and 6) Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Impacts: New or 7 
newly discovered negative impact(s) as reported by the Chief Technology Officer’s 8 
(CTO’s) annual Equity Impact Assessment; and 9 
WHEREAS, a surveillance technology that undergoes a material update that is not reported to 10 
Seattle IT may be ordered by the CTO to be removed from service until the impacts of 11 
the change can be determined and documented under the terms of Seattle Municipal Code 12 
Chapter 14.18 and this policy; and 13 
WHEREAS, expanding ALPR functionality as a component of the existing in-car video platform 14 
to include all SPD vehicles with onboard in-car video qualifies as a material update; and  15 
WHEREAS, the back-office system through which ALPR camera data are interpreted and ALPR 16 
is administered will change from the Neology PIPS platform to the expanded Axon Fleet 17 
Hub platform qualifies as a material update; and 18 
WHEREAS, all sworn SPD officers will be trained in the use of the in-car video with ALPR 19 
enabled functionality; and 20 
WHEREAS, expanded ALPR capability will allow SPD to better address the growing vehicle 21 
theft problem. Motor vehicle theft has increased citywide by 89.6 percent since the pre-22 
pandemic year of 2019, from 3,992 reported incidents to 7,569. This upward trend 23 

Nick Zajchowski / Tamaso Johnson 
SPD ALPR Fleet-Wide Update SIR ORD 
D3 
Template last revised December 13,, 2022 3 
continues, with an increase of 9.6 percent in the first 11 months of 2023 compared to the 1 
same period in 2022, from 6,906 to 7,569 reported incidents; and 2 
WHEREAS, SPD detectives have noted links between vehicle theft and gun violence, robberies, 3 
commercial burglaries; and 4 
WHEREAS, the updated functionality of ALPR is important to achieve the Police Department’s 5 
mission to prevent crime, enforce the law, and support quality public safety by delivering 6 
respectful, professional, and dependable police services; NOW, THEREFORE, 7 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SEATTLE AS FOLLOWS: 8 
Section 1. Pursuant to Ordinances 125376 and 125679, the City Council approves use of 9 
the Seattle Police Department’s use of Automated License Plate Reader (ALPR) Fleet-Wide and 10 
accepts the updated 2023 Surveillance Impact Report (SIR) for this technology, attached to this 11 
ordinance as Attachment 1, and the Executive Overview for the same technology, attached to this 12 
ordinance as Attachment 2. 13 
Section 2. The Seattle Police Department’s use of the ALPR technology is approved, 14 
provided that the Seattle Police Department shall not disclose ALPR data in response to a 15 
records request made under the Public Records Act (chapter 42.56 RCW), or otherwise publicly 16 
disclose ALPR data in a manner that links a license plate to a time, date, or location, unless 17 
required to do so by court order or applicable law. The Seattle Police Department's legal counsel 18 
shall promptly notify the City Council’s legislative legal counsel of any such court order or 19 
applicable law. 20 
Section 3. The Council requests that the Seattle Police Department include in any 21 
contract with a vendor for the implementation of ALPR technology terms: 1) requiring the 22 
vendor to immediately notify SPD if the vendor receives a warrant or subpoena seeking SPD 23 

Nick Zajchowski / Tamaso Johnson 
SPD ALPR Fleet-Wide Update SIR ORD 
D3 
Template last revised December 13,, 2022 4 
ALPR data for any purpose, including purposes related to reproductive healthcare or gender-1 
affirming medical services; and, 2) requiring the vendor to retain legal counsel to challenge any 2 
such warrant or subpoena and advise of outcome or existence of warrant after expiration. SPD 3 
shall notify the Council upon receipt of information related to a vendor warrant or subpoena 4 
described above. The Seattle Police Department shall provide the Council with a copy of the 5 
ALPR vendor contract once executed but no later than the transmittal of the mayor’s 2025-2026 6 
budget.  7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 14 
 15 
 16 
 17 
 18 
 19 
 20 
 21 
 22 

Nick Zajchowski / Tamaso Johnson 
SPD ALPR Fleet-Wide Update SIR ORD 
D3 
Template last revised December 13,, 2022 5 
Section 4. This ordinance shall take effect as provided by Seattle Municipal Code 1 
Sections 1.04.020 and 1.04.070. 2 
Passed by the City Council the ________ day of _________________________, 2024, 3 
and signed by me in open session in authentication of its passage this ________ day of 4 
_________________________, 2024. 5 
____________________________________ 6 
President ____________ of the City Council 7 
 Approved / returned unsigned / vetoed this _____ day of _________________, 2024. 8 
____________________________________ 9 
Bruce A. Harrell, Mayor 10 
Filed by me this ________ day of _________________________, 2024. 11 
____________________________________ 12 
Scheereen Dedman, City Clerk 13 
(Seal) 14 
Attachments:  15 
Attachment 1 – 2023 Surveillance Impact Report: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) 16 
(Fleet-Wide) 17 
Attachment 2 – 2023 Surveillance Impact Report Executive Overview: Automated License Plate 18 
Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 19 
18th
June
18th
June
24th
June
✔
June
24th

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-
Wide ALPR |page i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2023 Surveillance Impact Report  
AUTOMATED LICENSE 
PLATE RECOGNITION 
(ALPR) (FLEET-WIDE) 
Seattle Police Department  
 
 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-
Wide ALPR |page 2 
 
Upcoming 
for Review Initial Draft
Open 
Comment 
Period
Final Draft Working 
Group
Council 
Review
 
Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview 
About the Surveillance Ordinance 
The Seattle City Council passed Ordinance 125376, also referred to as the “Surveillance 
Ordinance,” on September 1, 2017. SMC 14.18.020.b.1 charges the City’s executive with 
developing a process to identify surveillance technologies subject to the ordinance. Seattle IT, 
on behalf of the executive, developed and implemented a process through which a privacy and 
surveillance review is completed prior to the acquisition of new technologies. This requirement, 
and the criteria used in the review process, are documented in Seattle IT Policy PR-02, the 
“Surveillance Policy”.  
How this Document is Completed 
This document is completed by the requesting department staff, supported and coordinated by 
the Seattle Information Technology Department (“Seattle IT”). As Seattle IT and department 
staff complete the document, they should keep the following in mind. 
1. Responses to questions should be in the text or checkboxes only; all other information 
(questions, descriptions, etc.) Should not be edited by the department staff completing 
this document.  
2. All content in this report will be available externally to the public. With this in mind, 
avoid using acronyms, slang, or other terms which may not be well-known to external 
audiences. Additionally, responses should be written using principally non-technical 
language to ensure they are accessible to audiences unfamiliar with the topic. 
Surveillance Ordinance Review Process 
The following is a high-level outline of the complete SIR review process. 
 
 
 
 
The technology is 
upcoming for 
review, but the 
department has 
not begun drafting 
the surveillance 
impact report 
(SIR). 
Work on the initial 
draft of the SIR is 
currently 
underway. 
The initial draft of 
the SIR and 
supporting 
materials have 
been released for 
public review and 
comment. During 
this time, one or 
more public 
meetings will take 
place to solicit 
feedback. 
During this stage 
the SIR, including 
collection of all 
public comments 
related to the 
specific 
technology, is 
being compiled 
and finalized. 
The surveillance 
advisory working 
group will review 
each SIR’s final 
draft and 
complete a civil 
liberties and 
privacy 
assessment, which 
will then be 
included with the 
City Council will 
decide on the use 
of the surveillance 
technology, by full 
Council vote. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Surveillance Impact Report (“SIR”) overview | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-
Wide ALPR |page 3 
 
SIR and submitted 
to Council. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 4 
 
Privacy Impact Assessment  
Purpose 
A Privacy Impact Assessment (“PIA”) is a method for collecting and documenting detailed 
information collected in order to conduct an in-depth privacy review of a program or project. A 
PIA asks questions about the collection, use, sharing, security and access controls for data that 
is gathered using a technology or program. It also requests information about policies, training 
and documentation that govern use of the technology. The PIA responses are used to 
determine privacy risks associated with a project and mitigations that may reduce some or all of 
those risks. In the interests of transparency about data collection and management, the City of 
Seattle has committed to publishing all PIAs on an outward facing website for public access.  
When is a Privacy Impact Assessment Required? 
A PIA may be required in two circumstances. 
1. When a project, technology, or other review has been flagged as having a high privacy 
risk.  
2. When a technology is required to complete the surveillance impact report process. This 
is one deliverable that comprises the report. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 5 
 
1.0 Abstract  
1.1 Please provide a brief description (one paragraph) of the purpose and proposed use of the 
project/technology. 
Seattle Police Department facilitates the flow of traffic (by monitoring and enforcing City 
parking restrictions) and recovers lost and stolen property through a number of means 
including Automated License Plate Reader (ALPR) technology.  ALPR is utilized in the recovery 
of stolen vehicles, to assist with active investigations, Scofflaw Law enforcement, and parking 
enforcement. 
This Surveillance Impact Report focuses on SPD use of ALPR as a necessary law enforcement 
tool in two capacities: 
1. Property Recovery – SPD employs ALPR to locate stolen vehicles, as well as 
vehicles associated with a court-issued warrant. 
2. Investigation – On occasion, SPD relies on license plate data to locate 
vehicle placement within the past 90 days (retention period), in the course 
of an active investigation or in support of legal proceedings.   
Note that ALPR usage for parking enforcement is discussed in the Surveillance Impact Report 
entitled “Parking Enforcement Systems.” 
1.2 Explain the reason the project/technology is being created or updated and why the PIA is 
required.  
 ALPR collects license plate information from vehicles, which could, if unregulated and 
indiscriminately used, be linked to other data to personally identify individuals.   
2.0 Project / Technology Overview 
Provide an overview of the project or technology. The overview gives the context and 
background necessary to understand the purpose, mission and justification for the project / 
technology proposed. 
2.1 Describe the benefits of the project/technology. 
ALPR assists the City in managing the flow of traffic by monitoring and enforcing City parking 
restrictions and locating and recovering lost/stolen property.  Additionally, the ALPR system 
aids with active criminal investigations by helping to determine the location of vehicles of 
interest related to a specific case.  
2.2 Provide any data or research demonstrating anticipated benefits. 
General news reporting about ALPR Benefits: https://patch.com/california/glendora/plate-
reader-helps-police-find-stolen-cars-make-warrant-arrests 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 6 
 
2.3 Describe the technology involved. 
Fleet-wide ALPR for SPD Patrol operations is a component of the Axon Fleet 3 in-car video 
platform. 
The high-speed cameras capture images of license plates as they move into view, and 
associated software deciphers the characters on the plate, using optical character 
recognition.  This interpretation is then immediately checked against any license plate 
numbers that have been uploaded into the onboard, in-vehicle software system.  Twice a 
day, the License Plate Reader File (known as the HotList), a list of license plate numbers from 
the Washington Crime Information Center (WACIC) and the FBI’s National Crime Information 
Center (NCIC), is uploaded into the ALPR system (via a connection to WACIC), which is a 
source of “hits” for the license plate reader system.  The license plate numbers compiled on 
the HotList “may be stolen vehicles, vehicles wanted in conjunction with felonies, wanted 
persons, and vehicles subject to seizure based on federal court orders” (WSP Memorandum 
of Understanding No. C141174GSC; March 11, 2014).  Other sources include the City of 
Seattle Municipal Court’s scofflaw list and content uploaded for overtime and metered 
parking enforcement (which are covered in the Parking Enforcement Systems SIR).  No ALPR 
data collected by SPD are automatically uploaded into any system outside of SPD.   
SPD contracts with Axon to provide both ALPR enabled in-car video hardware and software 
for the Fleet 3 Hub software system through which camera reads are interpreted and 
administrative control is managed.  This includes the ability to set and verify retention 
periods, track and log user activity, view camera “read” and “hit” data, and manage user 
permissions.    
The configuration is designed such that the cameras capture the images and filter the reads 
through the linked Fleet 3 Hub software to determine if/when a hit occurs.   
When the software identifies a hit, it issues an audible alert, and a visual notification informs 
the user which list the hit comes from – HotList; Scofflaw; time-restricted overtime parking.   
A “HIT” triggers a chain of responses from the user that includes visual confirmation that the 
computer interpretation of the camera image is accurate, and the officer verbally checks with 
Dispatch for confirmation that the license plate is truly of interest before any action is taken.  
This is done to ensure the system is accurately reading license plates.  When an inaccuracy is 
detected, users may choose to enter a note into the system that the “hit” was a misread.   
All data collected by the ALPR systems – images, computer-interpreted license plate 
numbers, date, time, and GPS location – are stored and retained for 90 days. After 90 days, 
all data collected by the ALPR systems is automatically deleted (unless it has been flagged as 
serving an investigative purpose – in which case, it is included in an investigation file).  
 
2.4 Describe how the project or use of technology relates to the department’s mission. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 7 
 
The mission of the Seattle Police Department is to prevent crime, enforce the law, and 
support quality public safety by delivering respectful, professional, and dependable police 
services. SPD’s department priorities include the use of best practices that include officer 
safety guidelines and performance-based accountability to provide progressive and 
responsive police services to crime victims, witnesses, and all members of the community, 
and to structure the organization to support the SPD mission and field a well-trained sworn 
and non-sworn workforce that uses technology, training, equipment, and research 
strategically and effectively. 
Seattle Police Department uses ALPR technology in its pursuit of maintaining public safety 
and enforcing applicable laws related to stolen vehicles and other crimes.   
2.5 Who will be involved with the deployment and use of the project / technology? 
All SPD vehicles with onboard in-car video will have ALPR functionality enabled. All sworn SPD 
officers will be trained in the use of the in-car video with ALPR enabled functionality.  
3.0 Use Governance  
Provide an outline of any rules that will govern the use of the project / technology. Please note: non-City 
entities contracting with the City are bound by restrictions specified in the surveillance ordinance and 
privacy principles and must provide written procedures for how the entity will comply with any 
restrictions identified. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 8 
 
3.1 Describe the processes that are required prior to each use, or access to/ of the project / 
technology, such as a notification, or check-in, check-out of equipment. 
The ALPR system is used passively to receive reads and hits, actively to coordinate 
resources during an active event, or for investigative purposes based on historical 
reads. All officers equipped with an ALPR system will be trained prior to gaining 
any access to the ALPR system. Once this training has been verified with the ALPR 
administrator, users are given access and must log into the system with unique 
login and password information whenever they employ the technology. They 
remained logged into the system the entire time that the ALPR system is in 
operation. The login and use history is logged and can be audited. Patrol Officers 
are assigned the vehicles to use while on-shift. Access to the historical reads is 
limited to specific authorized individuals permanently assigned to the Real Time 
Crime Center and/or Intelligence Units and who have completed training on the 
ALPR system. If individuals are transferred out of those units, their permissions to 
the system will be revoked. Any request to search the historical reads by any 
officer must be accompanied by a written request identifying the requestor, the 
reason for the search, including the reasonable suspicion or probable cause and 
the associated case number, and submitted to an authorized individual to perform 
the search. As with all access to the ALPR system, every access and search is logged 
in the system. Access and use of the system will be audited by the SPD Audit Unit 
and the Office of the Inspector General. 
3.2 List the legal standards or conditions, if any, that must be met before the project / 
technology is used.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 9 
 
ALPR systems can be used during routine patrol, specific to a criminal investigation 
(i.e., to locate a stolen vehicle), or parking enforcement as per SPD Policy 16.170. 
The policy requires that users must be trained; they must be certified in A Central 
Computerized Enforcement Service System (ACCESS) – a computer controlled 
communications system maintained by Washington State Patrol that extracts data 
from multiple repositories, including Washington Crime Information Center, 
Washington State Identification System, the National Crime Information Center, 
the Department of Licensing, the Department of Corrections Offender File, the 
International Justice and Public Safety Network, and PARKS - and trained in the 
proper use of ALPR. In addition, the policy limits use of the technology to strictly 
routine patrol or criminal investigation. Further, the policy clarifies that users may 
only request access to historical ALPR data when that data relates to a specific 
criminal investigation as described above. A record of these requests is maintained 
by the ALPR administrator and subject to auditing by SPD Audit Unit and the Office 
of the Inspector General. 
3.3 Describe the policies and training required of all personnel operating the project / 
technology, and who has access to ensure compliance with use and management policies. 
SPD Policy 16.170 addresses Automatic License Plate Readers. The policy requires 
that users must be trained; they must be certified in A Central Computerized 
Enforcement Service System (ACCESS) – a computer controlled communications 
system maintained by Washington State Patrol that extracts data from multiple 
repositories, including Washington Crime Information Center, Washington State 
Identification System, the National Crime Information Center, the Department of 
Licensing, the Department of Corrections Offender File, the International Justice 
and Public Safety Network, and PARKS - and trained in the proper use of ALPR. 
Further, the policy clarifies that users may only request access to historical ALPR 
data when that data relates to a specific criminal investigation as described above. 
A record of these requests is maintained by the ALPR administrator and subject to 
auditing by SPD Audit Unit and the Office of the Inspector General. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 10 
 
4.0 Data Collection and Use 
4.1 Provide details about what information is being collected from sources other than an 
individual, including other IT systems, systems of record, commercial data aggregators, 
publicly available data and/or other City departments. 
Data collected from ALPR includes license plate image, computer-interpreted read of the 
license plate number, date, time, and GPS location.   
All ALPR-equipped vehicles upload a daily HotList that contains only license plate numbers, 
with the associated states, that are under active search warrant from NCIC and WASIC.  
4.2 What measures are in place to minimize inadvertent or improper collection of data? 
When the ALPR system registers a hit – a match to license plate number listed on the HotList 
(as described in 2.3 above) - the user must verify accuracy before taking any action.  For 
instance, when the system registers a hit on a stolen vehicle, the user must visually verify 
that the system accurately read the license plate and, if so, must then contact Dispatch to 
verify accuracy of the hit – that the vehicle is actually listed as stolen.  Only then does the 
user take action.  
Unless a hit has been flagged for investigation and exported from the database for this 
purpose, all captured data will be automatically deleted after 90 days, per department 
retention policy.   
4.3 How and when will the project / technology be deployed or used? By whom? Who will 
determine when the project / technology is deployed and used? 
In-car video systems with enabled ALPR will be used in Patrol on a daily basis by authorized 
police officers (see 2.5 above).   
4.4 How often will the technology be in operation?  
In-car video systems with enabled ALPR will be used in Patrol on a daily basis by authorized 
police officers (see 2.5 above).   
4.5 What is the permanence of the installation? Is it installed permanently, or temporarily? 
Fleet-wide ALPR is a component of permanently installed in-car video. 
4.6 Is a physical object collecting data or images visible to the public? What are the markings 
to indicate that it is in use? What signage is used to determine department ownership and 
contact information? 
Fleet-wide ALPR is a component of permanently installed in-car video. Most SPD vehicles 
which have in-car video units installed are clearly marked as police vehicles. In-car video with 
enabled ALPR is installed in a few unmarked SPD vehicles which also have in-car video units. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 11 
 
4.7 How will data that is collected be accessed and by whom?  
Only authorized users can access the data collected by ALPR.  Per SPD Policy 16.170, 
authorized users must access the data only for active investigations and all activity by users in 
the system is logged and can be audited.  SPD personnel within specific investigative units 
have access to ALPR data during its retention window of 90 days, during which time they can 
reference the data if it relates to a specific investigation.   
Data removed from the system/technology and entered into investigative files is securely 
inputted and used on SPD’s password-protected network with access limited to detectives 
and identified supervisory personnel. 
SPD employee access is controlled by SPD Manual Title 12 provisions governing Department 
Information Systems including SPD Policy 12.040 - Department-Owned Computers, Devices & 
Software, SPD Policy 12.050 - Criminal Justice Information Systems, SPD Policy 12.080 – 
Department Records Access, Inspection & Dissemination, SPD Policy 12.110 – Use of 
Department E-mail & Internet Systems, and SPD Policy 12.111 – Use of Cloud Storage 
Services.  
 
4.8 If operated or used by another entity on behalf of the City, provide details about access, 
and applicable protocols.  
ALPR systems are operated and used only by SPD personnel.   
 
4.9 What are acceptable reasons for access to the equipment and/or data collected?  
Users can only access the equipment for purposes earlier outlined (see 1.0) – recovery of lost 
or stolen property, to assist with active investigations, Scofflaw Law enforcement, and 
parking enforcement.  Per SPD Policy 16.170, “ALPR may be used during routine patrol or any 
criminal investigation,” and users can access “patrol ALPR data only when the data relates to 
a specific criminal investigation.”   
4.10 What safeguards are in place for protecting data from unauthorized access (encryption, 
access control mechanisms, etc.) And to provide an audit trail (viewer logging, modification 
logging, etc.)? 
Individuals can only access the ALPR system via unique login credentials.  Hardware systems 
can only be accessed in-vehicle. As previously noted, all activity in the system is logged and 
can be audited.   
SPD’s Audit Unit can conduct an audit of the system at any time. The Office of Inspector 
General and the federal monitor can also access all data and audit for compliance at any 
time. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 12 
 
5.0 Data Storage, Retention and Deletion  
5.1 How will data be securely stored? 
All data collected from the ALPR system is stored, maintained, and managed in a CJIS 
certified evidence retention platform.  Retention is automated, such that unless a record is 
identified as being related to a criminal investigation and exported in support of that 
investigation, all ALPR data is deleted after 90 days.  No backup data is captured or retained.   
 
5.2 How will the owner allow for departmental and other entities, to audit for compliance 
with legal deletion requirements? 
SPD’s Audit Unit can conduct an audit of any SPD system at any time. In addition, the Office 
of Inspector General can access all data and audit for compliance at any time. 
SPD conducts periodic reviews of audit logs and they are available for review at any time by 
the Seattle Intelligence Ordinance Auditor under the City of Seattle Intelligence Ordinance. 
The software automatically alerts users of data that must be deleted under legal deletion 
requirements such as 28 CFR Part 23. 
5.3 What measures will be used to destroy improperly collected data?  
Once a license plate has been read, this data is automatically retained for a period of 90 days.  
Unless the data is needed for a specific investigation, it is automatically deleted after 90 days.   
 
5.4 which specific departmental unit or individual is responsible for ensuring compliance with 
data retention requirements?  
Seattle City IT, in conjunction with SPD’s ALPR administrator, is responsible for ensuring 
compliance with data retention requirements.  Additionally, external audits by OIG and the 
Federal Monitor can review and ensure compliance, at any time.   
6.0 Data Sharing and Accuracy  
6.1 Which entity or entities inside and external to the City will be data sharing partners? 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 13 
 
No person, outside of SPD, has direct access to the ALPR system or the data while it resides in 
the system.   
Data obtained from the system may be shared outside SPD as required by law. 
Data may be shared with outside entities in connection with criminal investigations and 
prosecutions:  
• Seattle City Attorney’s Office 
• King County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office 
• King County Department of Public Defense 
• Private Defense Attorneys 
• Seattle Municipal Court 
• King County Superior Court 
• Similar entities where prosecution is in Federal or other State jurisdictions 
 
Data may be made available to requesters pursuant to the Washington Public Records Act, 
Chapter 42.56 RCW (“PRA”). SPD will apply applicable exemptions to the data before 
disclosing to a requester.  Individuals have the right to inspect criminal history record 
information maintained by the department (RCW 10.97.030, SPD Policy 12.050). Individuals can 
access their own information by submitting a public disclosure request. 
 
Per SPD Policy 12.080, the Crime Records Unit is responsible for receiving, recording, and 
responding to requests “for General Offense Reports from other City departments and from 
other law enforcement agencies, as well as from insurance companies.”   
Discrete pieces of data collected by the ALPR may be shared with other law enforcement agencies in 
wanted bulletins, and in connection with law enforcement investigations jointly conducted with those 
agencies, or in response to requests from law enforcement agencies investigating criminal activity as 
governed by SPD Policy 12.050 and 12.110.  All requests for data from Federal Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement (ICE) authorities are referred to the Mayor’s Office Legal Counsel in accordance 
with the Mayoral Directive, dated February 6, 2018. 
 
SPD shares data with authorized researchers pursuant to properly executed research and 
confidentiality agreements as provided by SPD Policy 12.055.  This sharing may include 
discrete pieces of data related to specific investigative files collected by the ALPR system.   
 
6.2 Why is data sharing necessary? 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 14 
 
Data sharing is frequently necessary during the course of a criminal investigation to follow up 
on leads and gather information on suspects from outside law enforcement agencies. 
Cooperation between law enforcement agencies is an essential part of the investigative 
process. 
Products developed using this information may be shared with other law enforcement 
agencies. All products created with the information used in this project will be classified as 
Law Enforcement Sensitive. Any bulletins will be marked with the following restrictions: LAW 
ENFORCEMENT SENSITIVE — DO NOT LEAVE PRINTED COPIES UNATTENDED — DISPOSE OF 
IN SHREDDER ONLY – NOT FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY OR DISTRIBUTION — DO NOT FORWARD OR 
COPY. 
6.3 Are there any restrictions on non-City data use?  
Yes ☒ No ☐ 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 15 
 
6.3.1 If you answered yes, provide a copy of the department’s procedures and policies for 
ensuring compliance with these restrictions. 
Law enforcement agencies receiving criminal history information are subject to the 
requirements of 28 CFR Part 20. In addition, Washington State law enforcement 
agencies  are subject to the provisions of WAC 446-20-260, and RCW Chapter 10.97. 
Once disclosed in response to PRA request, there are no restrictions on non-City data 
use; however, applicable exemptions will be applied prior to disclosure to any 
requestor who is not authorized to receive exempt content.   
6.4 How does the project/technology review and approve information sharing agreements, 
memorandums of understanding, new uses of the information, new access to the system by 
organizations within City of Seattle and outside agencies?  
Research agreements must meet the standards reflected in SPD Policy 12.055. Law 
enforcement agencies receiving criminal history information are subject to the requirements 
of 28 CFR Part 20. In addition, Washington State law enforcement agencies are subject to the 
provisions of WAC 446-20-260, and RCW Chapter 10.97. 
Following Council approval of the SIR, SPD must seek Council approval for any material 
change to the purpose or manner in which the [system or technology] may be used. 
6.5 Explain how the project/technology checks the accuracy of the information collected. If 
accuracy is not checked, please explain why. 
System users are trained to visually verify accuracy, comparing a license plate hit to the 
physical plate/vehicle that the system read before taking any action.  If they note a misread, 
they can enter a note into the system recognizing the read, as such.  If they cannot verify 
visually, no action is taken.     
6.6 Describe any procedures that allow individuals to access their information and correct 
inaccurate or erroneous information. 
Individuals may request records pursuant to the PRA, and individuals have the right to inspect 
criminal history record information maintained by the department (RCW 10.97.030, SPD Policy 
12.050). Individuals can access their own information by submitting a public disclosure request. 
7.0 Legal Obligations, Risks and Compliance 
7.1 What specific legal authorities and/or agreements permit and define the collection of 
information by the project/technology? 
ALPR use is not legally constrained at the local, state, or federal level.  Instead, retention of 
data is restricted.  SPD retains license plate data that is not case specific (i.e., related to an 
investigation) for 90 days.   
Case specific data is maintained for the retention period applicable to the specific case type.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 16 
 
7.2 Describe what privacy training is provided to users either generally or specifically relevant 
to the project/technology. 
SPD Policy 12.050 mandates that all employees receive Security Awareness Training (Level 2), and 
all employees also receive City Privacy Training. All SPD employees must adhere to laws, City 
policy, and Department Policy (SPD Policy 5.001), many of which contain specific privacy 
requirements. Any employees suspected of being in violation of laws or policy or other 
misconduct are subject to discipline, as outlined in SPD Policy 5.002.   
7.3 Given the specific data elements collected, describe the privacy risks identified and for 
each risk, explain how it was mitigated. Specific risks may be inherent in the sources or 
methods of collection, or the quality or quantity of information included. 
Each component of data collected, on its own, does not pose a privacy risk.  Paired with other 
known or auditable information, however, an individual may be able to personally identify 
owners of vehicles, and then use that information to determine, to a certain degree, where 
specific vehicles have been located.  Because SPD’s fleet-wide ALPR cameras are not fixed in 
location and records are only retained for 90 days, privacy risk is substantially mitigated 
because of the limited ability to identify vehicle patterns.   
Per SPD Policy 16.170, general users of ALPR are restricted from accessing the data, except as 
it relates to a specific criminal investigation.  Any activity by a user to access this information 
is logged and auditable.  The PRA requires release of collected ALPR data, however, making it 
possible for members of the general public to make those identification connections on their 
own if they have access to the information necessary to do so, such as an independent 
knowledge of a particular individual’s license plate number.    
 
7.4 Is there any aspect of the project/technology that might cause concern by giving the 
appearance to the public of privacy intrusion or misuse of personal information?  
As mentioned in 7.3, the data could be used to personally identify individuals; however, SPD 
policy prohibits the use of data collected by ALPR to be used in any capacity beyond its 
relation to a specific criminal investigation or parking enforcement action.  Additionally, all 
collected data that is not relevant to an active investigation is automatically deleted after 90 
days of collection.   
8.0 Monitoring and Enforcement 
8.1 Describe how the project/technology maintains a record of any disclosures outside of the 
department. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy Impact Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 17 
 
Data collected by ALPR is only disclosed pursuant to the public under the PRA.  The only data 
available for disclosure is that data which remains in the system within the 90-day retention 
window.   
Per SPD Policy 12.080, the Crime Records Unit is responsible to receive and record all 
requests “for General Offense Reports from other City departments and from other law 
enforcement agencies, as well as from insurance companies.”   
Any requests for disclosure are logged by SPD’s Public Disclosure Unit.  Any action taken, and 
data released subsequently, is then tracked through the request log.  Responses to Public 
Disclosure Requests, including responsive records provided to a requestor, are retained by 
SPD for two years after the request is completed.   
8.2 What auditing measures are in place to safeguard the information, and policies that 
pertain to them, as well as who has access to the audit data? Explain whether the 
project/technology conducts self-audits, third party audits or reviews. 
The ALPR system does not self-audit.  Instead, third party audits exist, as follows: 1) The ALPR 
administrator has the responsibility of managing the user list and ensuring proper access to 
the system; 2) The Federal Monitor can conduct an audit at any time; and 3) the OIG can also 
conduct an audit.  Violations of policy may result in referral to Office of Police Accountability 
(OPA). 
SPD’s Audit Unit personnel can also conduct audits of all data collection software and systems. 
Additionally, any appropriate auditor, including the Office of Inspector General and the federal 
monitor can audit for compliance at any time.    
 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Financial Information | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 18 
 
Financial Information 
Purpose 
This section provides a description of the fiscal impact of the surveillance technology, as 
required by the surveillance ordinance. 
1.0 Fiscal Impact 
Provide a description of the fiscal impact of the project/technology by answering the questions 
below.  
1.1 Current or potential sources of funding: initial acquisition costs. 
Current ☒ potential ☐ 
Date of initial 
acquisition 
Date of go 
live 
Direct initial 
acquisition 
cost 
Professional 
services for 
acquisition 
Other 
acquisition 
costs 
Initial 
acquisition 
funding 
source 
2024 2024 $0 - -  
      
Notes: 
The hardware needed for the fleet-wide ALPR system is part of SPD’s in-car video system, so 
there are no acquisition costs associated with turning the ALPR portion on. 
1.2 Current or potential sources of funding: on-going operating costs, including maintenance, 
licensing, personnel, legal/compliance use auditing, data retention and security costs. 
Current ☐ potential ☐ 
Annual 
maintenance and 
licensing  
Legal/compliance, 
audit, data 
retention and 
other security 
costs 
Department 
overhead 
IT overhead Annual funding 
source 
$280,000 - $77,000 TBD General Fund 
Notes: 
The costs for fleet-wide ALPR software, hardware, maintenance, and support are annual and 
ongoing. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Financial Information | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 19 
 
1.3 Cost savings potential through use of the technology 
There are not expected to be any cost savings from this technology, only increased ability to 
locate stolen and wanted vehicles. 
1.4 Current or potential sources of funding including subsidies or free products offered by 
vendors or governmental entities 
 
 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Expertise and References | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 20 
 
Expertise and References  
Purpose 
The following information is provided to ensure that Council has a group of experts to reference 
while reviewing the completed surveillance impact report (“SIR”). Any individuals or agencies 
referenced must be made aware ahead of publication that their information has been included. 
All materials must be available for Council to access or review, without requiring additional 
purchase or contract. 
1.0 Other Government References 
Please list any other government bodies that have implemented this technology and can speak 
to the implementation of this technology. 
Agency, municipality, etc. Primary contact Description of current use 
Washington State Patrol  
 
   
   
2.0 Academics, Consultants, and Other Experts 
Please list any experts in the technology under consideration, or in the technical completion of the 
service or function the technology is responsible for.   
Agency, municipality, etc. Primary contact Description of current use 
Bryce Newell, PhD Brycenewell@uky.edu  “Transparent Lives and the 
Surveillance State: Policing, 
New Visibility, and 
Information Policy” – A 
Dissertation     
3.0 White Papers or Other Documents 
Please list any authoritative publication, report or guide that is relevant to the use of this technology or 
this type of technology.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Expertise and References | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 21 
 
Automated 
License Plate 
Recognition 
Systems: 
Policy and 
Operational 
Guidance for 
Law 
Enforcement 
 
 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/239604.pdf 
 
   
 
  
US Department 
of Justice 
(federally-
funded grant 
report) 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 22 
 
Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public 
comment worksheet 
Purpose 
Departments submitting a SIR are required to complete an adapted version of the Racial Equity 
Toolkit (“RET”) in order to: 
• Provide a framework for the mindful completion of the SIR in a way that is sensitive to 
the historic exclusion of vulnerable and historically underrepresented communities. 
Particularly, to inform the public engagement efforts departments will complete as part 
of the surveillance impact report. 
• Highlight and mitigate any impacts on racial equity from the adoption and the use of the 
technology. 
• Highlight and mitigate any disparate impacts on individuals or vulnerable communities.   
• Fulfill the public engagement requirements of the surveillance impact report. 
Adaptation of the RET for Surveillance Impact Reports 
The RET was adapted for the specific use by the Seattle Information Technology Departments’ 
(“Seattle IT”) Privacy Team, the Office of Civil Rights (“OCR”), and Change Team members from 
Seattle IT, Seattle City Light, Seattle Fire Department, Seattle Police Department, and Seattle 
Department of Transportation. 
Racial Equity Toolkit Overview 
The vision of the Seattle Race and Social Justice Initiative (“RSJI”) is to eliminate racial inequity 
in the community. To do this requires ending individual racism, institutional racism and 
structural racism. The RET lays out a process and a set of questions to guide the development, 
implementation and evaluation of policies, initiatives, programs, and budget issues to address 
the impacts on racial equity.  
1.0 Set Outcomes 
1.1. Seattle City Council has defined the following inclusion criteria in the surveillance 
ordinance, and they serve as important touchstones for the risks departments are being 
asked to resolve and/or mitigate. Which of the following inclusion criteria apply to this 
technology? 
☐ The technology disparately impacts disadvantaged groups.  
☐ There is a high likelihood that personally identifiable information will be shared with non-City 
entities that will use the data for a purpose other than providing the City with a contractually 
agreed-upon service.  
☐ The technology collects data that is personally identifiable even if obscured, de-identified, or 
anonymized after collection.  
☐ The technology raises reasonable concerns about impacts to civil liberty, freedom of speech 
or association, racial equity, or social justice. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 23 
 
1.2 What are the potential impacts on civil liberties through the implementation of this 
technology? How is the department mitigating these risks? 
Without appropriate policy, license plate data could be paired with other identifiable 
information about individuals that could be used to identify individuals without reasonable 
suspicion of having committed a crime, or to data mine for information that is not incidental 
to any active investigation.  SPD Policy 16.170 mitigates this concern by limiting operation to 
solely routine patrol, criminal investigations, and parking enforcement.     
1.3 What are the risks for racial or ethnicity-based bias through each use or deployment of 
this technology? How is the department mitigating these risks? 
Include a description of any issues that may arise such as algorithmic bias or the possibility for 
ethnic bias to emerge in people and/or system decision-making.  
Trust in SPD is impacted by its treatment of all individuals.  Equity in treatment, regardless of 
actual or perceived race, gender, sex, sexual orientation, country of origin, religion, ethnicity, 
age, and ability is critical to establishing and maintaining trust.   
Per the 2016 Race and Social Justice Initiative Community Survey, measuring “the 
perspectives of those who live, work, and go to school in Seattle, including satisfaction with 
City services, neighborhood quality, housing affordability, feelings about the state of racial 
equity in the city, and the role of government in addressing racial inequities,” 56.1% of 
African American/Black respondents, 47.3% of Multiracial respondents, and 47% of 
Indian/Alaska Native respondents have little to no confidence in the police to do a good job 
enforcing the law, as compared with 31.5% of White respondents.  Further, while 54.9% of 
people of color have a great deal or fair amount of confidence in the police to treat people of 
color and White people equally, 45.1% of people of color have little to no confidence in the 
police to treat people equitably.  This is contrasted with White respondents, of which 67.5% 
have a great deal or fair amount of confidence in the police to treat people of color and 
White people equally.  This may be rooted in feelings of disparate types of contact with the 
police, across racial groups.  While 14.3% of White respondents, 14.7% of Asian/Pacific 
Islander respondents, and 16.7% of Latino/Hispanic respondents reported being questioned 
by the police, charged, or arrested when they had not committed a crime, some communities 
of color reported much higher rates (American Indian/Alaska Native -52.7%; Black/African 
American - 46.8%; and Multiracial - 36.8%) of this type of contact with the criminal justice 
system.       
As it relates to ALPR, it is important that SPD continue to follow its policy of limiting use of 
the technology to strictly routine patrol or criminal investigation, as well as limiting access to 
ALPR data to only instances in which it relates to a specific criminal investigation.  Further, 
continuing to audit the system on a regular basis, provides a measure of accountability.  In 
doing so, SPD can mitigate the appearance of disparate treatment of individuals based on 
factors other than true criminal activity.         
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 24 
 
1.4 Where in the City is the technology used or deployed?  
☒ all Seattle neighborhoods 
☐ Ballard 
☐ Belltown 
☐ Beacon Hill 
☐ Capitol Hill 
☐ Central District 
☐ Columbia City 
☐ Delridge 
☐ First Hill 
☐ Georgetown 
☐ Greenwood / Phinney 
☐ International District 
☐ Interbay 
☐ North 
☐ Northeast 
☐ Northwest 
☐ Madison Park / Madison Valley 
☐ Magnolia 
☐ Rainier Beach 
☐ Ravenna / Laurelhurst 
☐ South Lake Union / Eastlake 
☐ Southeast 
☐ Southwest 
☐ South Park 
☐ Wallingford / Fremont 
☐ West Seattle 
☒ King county (outside Seattle) (Mutual 
Aid) 
☒ Outside King County (Mutual Aid) 
 
If possible, please include any maps or visualizations of historical deployments / use. 
If possible, please include any maps or visualizations of historical deployments / use 
here. 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 25 
 
1.4.1 What are the racial demographics of those living in this area or impacted by 
these issues? 
City of Seattle demographics: White - 69.5%; Black or African American - 7.9%; Amer. 
Indian & Alaska Native - 0.8%; Asian - 13.8%; Native Hawaiian & Pacific Islander - 0.4; 
Other race - 2.4%; Two or more races - 5.1%; Hispanic or Latino ethnicity (of any race): 
6.6%; Persons of color: 33.7%. 
King County demographics: White – 70.1%; Black or African American – 6.7%; 
American Indian & Alaskan Native – 1.1%; Asian, Native Hawaiian, Pacific Islander – 
17.2%; Hispanic or Latino (of any race) – 9.4% 
1.4.2 How does the Department to ensure diverse neighborhoods, communities, or 
individuals are not specifically targeted through the use or deployment of this 
technology?  
Per SPD Policy 16.170, “Before employees operate the ALPR system or access ALPR 
data, they will complete Department training on the proper and lawful use of the 
system.” SPD Policy 5.140 forbids bias-based policing and outlines processes for 
reporting and documenting any suspected bias-based behavior, as well as 
accountability measures. 
Also, by equipping all in-car video throughout the department with ALPR, deployment 
of this system becomes non-discretionary.  
1.5 How do decisions around data sharing have the potential for disparate impact on 
historically targeted communities? What is the department doing to mitigate those risks?  
Historically targeted communities have often been denied the same opportunities for 
information privacy as the majority populations. Data sharing has the potential to 
be a contributing factor to structural racism and thus creating a disparate impact on 
historically targeted communities. In an effort to mitigate this possibility, SPD has established 
policies regarding the dissemination of data in connection with criminal prosecutions, 
Washington Public Records Act (Chapter 42.56 RCW), and other authorized researchers. 
Further, SPD Policy 5.140 forbids bias-based policing and outlines processes for reporting and 
documenting any suspected bias-based behavior, as well as accountability measures. 
 
1.6 How do decisions around data storage and retention have the potential for disparate 
impact on historically targeted communities? What is the department doing to mitigate those 
risks?  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 26 
 
As with decisions around data sharing, data storage and retention have similar potential for 
disparate impact on historically targeted communities. 
Further, SPD Policy 5.140 forbids bias-based policing and outlines processes for reporting and 
documenting any suspected bias-based behavior, as well as accountability measures. 
1.7 What are potential unintended consequences (both negative and positive potential 
impact)? What proactive steps can you can / have you taken to ensure these consequences 
do not occur. 
Without appropriate policy, license plate data could be paired with other identifiable 
information about individuals that could be used to identify individuals without reasonable 
suspicion of having committed a crime, or to data mine for information that is not incidental 
to any active investigation.  SPD Policy 16.170 mitigates this concern by limiting operation to 
solely routine patrol, criminal investigations, and parking enforcement.  90-day data 
retention also mitigates the risk of improper identification of community members.  
2.0 Public Outreach  
2.1 Organizations who received a personal invitation to participate.  
Public meetings are not required as part of the material change process; public comment was 
open from November to December 2023. General data can be found below and detailed public 
comment can be found in the appendix at the end of the document.  
The initial public meeting information can be found in the original SIR (CB 120025).  
3.0 Public Comment Analysis 
This section will be completed after the public comment period has been completed on [DATE] 
by Privacy Office staff. 
3.1 Summary of Response Volume 
220 public comments were received during the public comment period. Below is the 
demographic data for public comment via Microsoft forms.  
3.2 Question One: What concerns, if any, do you have about the use of this technology? 
Please see appendix at end of document for detailed public comment. 
3.3 Question Two: What value, if any, do you see in the use of this technology? 
Please see appendix at end of document for detailed public comment. 
3.4 Question Three: What would you want City leadership to consider when making a 
decision about the use of this technology? 
Please see appendix at end of document for detailed public comment. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Racial Equity Toolkit (“RET”) and engagement for public comment worksheet | 
Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 27 
 
3.5 Question Four: General response to the technology. 
Please see appendix at end of document for detailed public comment. 
3.5 General Surveillance Comments  
These are comments received that are not particular to any technology currently under review. 
Please see appendix at end of document for detailed public comment. 
4.0 Response to Public Comments 
This section will be completed after the public comment period has been completed on [DATE]. 
4.1 How will you address the concerns that have been identified by the public?  
What program, policy and partnership strategies will you implement? What strategies 
address immediate impacts? Long-term impacts? What strategies address root causes of 
inequity listed above? How will you partner with stakeholders for long-term positive 
change?  
5.0 Equity Annual Reporting  
5.1 What metrics for this technology be reported to the CTO for the annual equity 
assessments?  
 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR 
|page 28 
 
Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment 
Purpose 
This section shall be completed after public engagement has concluded and the department has 
completed the racial equity toolkit section above. The privacy and civil liberties assessment is completed 
by the community surveillance working group (“working group”), per the surveillance ordinance which 
states that the working group shall: 
“Provide to the executive and the City Council a privacy and civil liberties impact assessment for each SIR 
that must be included with any departmental request for surveillance technology acquisition or in-use 
approval. The impact assessment shall include a description of the potential impact of the surveillance 
technology on civil rights and liberties and potential disparate impacts on communities of color and 
other marginalized communities. The CTO shall share with the working group a copy of the SIR that shall 
also be posted during the period of public engagement. At the conclusion of the public engagement 
period, the CTO shall share the final proposed SIR with the working group at least six weeks prior to 
submittal of the SIR to Council for approval. The working group shall provide its impact assessment in 
writing to the executive and the City Council for inclusion in the SIR within six weeks of receiving the 
final proposed SIR. If the working group does not provide the impact assessment before such time, the 
working group must ask for a two-week extension of time to City Council in writing.   If the working 
group fails to submit an impact statement within eight weeks of receiving the SIR, the department and 
City Council may proceed with ordinance approval without the impact statement.” 
Working Group Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment 
A new Working Group Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment is not required as part of the 
Surveillance Impact Report material update process. Please refer to the Privacy and Civil 
Liberties Assessment in the original SIR (CB 120025). 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Submitting Department Response | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR 
|page 29 
 
Submitting Department Response 
Description  
Provide the high-level description of the technology, including whether software or hardware, 
who uses it and where/when.  
Purpose  
State the reasons for the use cases for this technology; how it helps meet the departmental 
mission; benefits to personnel and the public; under what ordinance or law it is used/mandated 
or required; risks to mission or public if this technology were not available.   
Benefits to the Public  
Provide technology benefit information, including those that affect departmental personnel, 
members of the public and the City in general.  
Privacy and Civil Liberties Considerations  
Provide an overview of the privacy and civil liberties concerns that have been raised over the 
use or potential mis-use of the technology; include real and perceived concerns.  
Summary  
Provide summary of reasons for technology use; benefits; and privacy considerations and how 
we are incorporating those concerns into our operational plans.  
 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix A: Glossary | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 30 
 
Appendix A: Glossary 
Accountable: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Responsive to the needs and concerns of those most 
impacted by the issues you are working on, particularly to communities of color and those historically 
underrepresented in the civic process. 
Community outcomes: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) The specific result you are seeking to 
achieve that advances racial equity. 
Contracting equity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Efforts to achieve equitable racial outcomes in 
the way the City spends resources, including goods and services, consultants and contracting. 
DON: “department of neighborhoods.”  
Immigrant and refugee access to services: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Government services 
and resources are easily available and understandable to all Seattle residents, including non-native 
English speakers. Full and active participation of immigrant and refugee communities exists in Seattle’s 
civic, economic and cultural life. 
Inclusive outreach and public engagement: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Processes inclusive of 
people of diverse races, cultures, gender identities, sexual orientations and socio-economic status. 
Access to information, resources and civic processes so community members can effectively engage in 
the design and delivery of public services. 
Individual racism: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Pre-judgment, bias, stereotypes about an 
individual or group based on race. The impacts of racism on individuals including white people 
internalizing privilege, and people of color internalizing oppression. 
Institutional racism: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Organizational programs, policies or 
procedures that work to the benefit of white people and to the detriment of people of color, usually 
unintentionally or inadvertently. 
OCR: “Office of Civil Rights.” 
Opportunity areas: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) One of seven issue areas the City of Seattle is 
working on in partnership with the community to eliminate racial disparities and create racial equity. 
They include: education, health, community development, criminal justice, jobs, housing, and the 
environment. 
Racial equity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) When social, economic and political opportunities 
are not predicted based upon a person’s race. 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix A: Glossary | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide ALPR |page 31 
 
Racial inequity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) When 
a person’s race can predict their social, economic, and 
political opportunities and outcomes. 
RET: “racial equity toolkit” 
Seattle neighborhoods: (taken from the racial equity toolkit 
neighborhood.) Boundaries defined for the purpose of 
understanding geographic areas in Seattle. 
Stakeholders: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Those 
impacted by proposed policy, program, or budget issue who 
have potential concerns or issue expertise. Examples might 
include: specific racial/ethnic groups, other institutions like 
Seattle housing authority, schools, community-based 
organizations, change teams, City employees, unions, etc. 
Structural racism: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) The 
interplay of policies, practices and programs of multiple 
institutions which leads to adverse outcomes and conditions 
for communities of color compared to white communities 
that occurs within the context of racialized historical and 
cultural conditions. 
Surveillance ordinance: Seattle City Council passed 
ordinance 125376, also referred to as the “surveillance 
ordinance.” 
SIR: “surveillance impact report”, a document which captures the fulfillment of the Council-defined 
surveillance technology review process, as required by ordinance 125376.  
Workforce equity: (taken from the racial equity toolkit.) Ensure the City's workforce diversity reflects 
the diversity of Seattle. 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 32 
 
Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis 
Responses to questions from the form:  
1. What concerns, if any, do you have about the use of this 
technology?   
  
ID  What concerns, if any, do you have about the use of this technology?   
1  
the 90-day searchable database of license plate reads is concerning. While using the ALPRs to find stolen property 
makes sense, the database of reads violates individuals' freedoms of movement and association. It also sounds 
like a potential violation of 4th amendment rights: SPD can scan someone's plate who is not involved in a crime 
and that information can be repeatedly searched over the course of 90 days.  
2  The long retention of data   
3  This is surveillance that increases risks for the public at large without providing a clear benefit to the public.  
4  
So many. Tracking of citizens who have not committed a crime would be unconstitutional. This data will be 
abused, cops are thugs and will do anything for power. Data hacking, info requests, and any myriad of other 
issues could come up.  
  
How many facists wanted to track everyone "just in case". Is 1% reduced crime worth my privacy, my views and 
my life? Nope   
5  
This is an insane surveillance overreach that has will cause more privacy violations than it will provide actual help 
in investigating actual crimes. Tracking and storing everyone's movements is so incredibly dystopian and I cannot 
believe this is even being considered. Just hire actual detectives and do real investigations.  
6  
Privacy, safety, accountability. The absurd claims that SPD can't delete these within two days, despite other 
forces doing it within minutes or hours. The ability of anyone to FOIA this information and use it to stalk, harass, 
or extort individuals.  
  
I also have serious concerns about trusting SPD with this technology, given the many documented cases over the 
past half decade of SPD officers inappropriately using this technology against specific civilians for personal 
reasons.  
7  None  
8  You will allow too many people to be able to track EVERYONE. For no reason. Having this data just sitting there is 
an intrusion into the everyones privacy.  
9  
The lengthy amount of time the data is kept on innocent people and the public availability of the data. The 
system should only be allowed to report hits on vehicles that are wanted for some reason. Saving the data on 
locations of all vehicles and making it available to FOIA requests could enable stalkers to track and harass victims. 
It would also let companies suck up huge amounts of data on the movements of people which could be 
repackaged and sold to anyone.   
10  
I am concerned about my privacy and the security of my personal data. I'm not comfortable with my location data 
being collected without my consent, and with that being stored for any length of time, nor with it being available 
to anyone who makes a public records request. I do not think I should have to give up this privacy in order to use 
Seattle streets.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 33 
 
11  
License plate data is stored for far longer than reasonably necessary.   
  
License plates of vehicles not involved in any crime are identified and tracked.   
  
Benefits of this technology are statistically negligible and do not justify the invasion of privacy of all citizens.   
12  Invasion of privacy, rights, and misuse of the technology to track people and vehicles.   
13  I have many concerns. My chest is to complain about police using budget to purchase license plate scanning 
technology for all patrol cars. It is gross misuse of funds, budget, tax dollars.   
14  
This is a huge invasion of privacy, especially with its massive 90-day retention period of captured images of 
license plates. Stop this proposal altogether, or require SPD discard captured images immediately if not attached 
to an open case.  
15  There is ample historical evidence that police in general, and SPD officers in particular, abuse databases for 
personal reasons and to target vulnerable populations such as undocumented immigrants.  
16  
Not only is it a concern that police can track individuals moves without any trace of criminal activity but the fact 
that an individual could do a public records request for your license plate is a danger for domestic violence 
victims.   
17  I’m extremely concerned with the tracking of peoples vehicles even when their plates are unflagged. SPD should 
not be allowed to retain these unflagged plates for longer than it takes to scan the number  
18  
Enabling stalkers and abusive people to track their victims. The SPD needs to focus on crime rather than collecting 
even more info to analyze. That they keep the info for an  inordinate amount of time shows they are not in a 
position to use the data for anything worthwhile. Taking away our ability to travel without being stalked is a 
major invasion of our rights. No evidence this reduces crime. Spend the money on prevention programs, not on 
unneeded, unproven and invasive technology.   
19  
Risks to privacy. Data companies submitting public information requests to obtain license plate and location data, 
then aggregating that data for sale. Even though the police only store the data for 90 days, anyone can request 
that data every 90 days and make them available either for free or for a fee. Imagine a website where you can 
enter your neighbors license plate and you can see where they have been at any time.  
20  
There are extremely limited use cases for this technology and I don't see the value for either the SPD or the 
public.  This system will not prevent, detect or deter crimes and is solely a data collection service for a branch of 
civil government with a history of abusing access to this type of information.   
  
The cost could be better used in many other public services within the SPD, such as training and better screening 
of members of the police force for various abusive behaviors before they are members of the force.   
  
The numbers from the existing use cases do not justify an expansion of this program and if anything, justify the 
termination of this service and the redistribution of the funding.  
  
Tools that provide extensive surveillance information on random members of the public & gathered without 
cause need to be tightly controlled and regulated as there is little legitimate use for the system.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 34 
 
21  
1. Documented history of abuse of official databases by police, explicitly including SPD.  
2. Bad faith arguments supporting expansion. Why can other municipalities purge records in literally minutes but 
Seattle requires an indefinite period?   
3. Value. Given the budget is perpetually thin, extraordinary evidence should be required before spending on 
dragnet surveillance efforts.  
22  
This is an incredibly terrible idea. What if someone makes a public records request for this information? If they 
knew your license plate number they could track you throughout the city, which would be an enormous invasion 
of privacy. I do not trust the city government to keep this information secure, and beyond that I see this as an 
expansion of police powers (via automation) that I am strongly against.  
23  Abuse of power, stalkers will easily be able to find victims,   
24  None  
25  Having spent a significant amount of time in Europe, I don't have any concerns with the use of this technology.  
26  Invasion of privacy.  
27  
It allows corruption to be legalized. Allowing so much power to law enforcement officers or citizens is asking for 
corruption. As much as 2% of vehicles in Seattle are on the hit list. The other 98% of vehicles should not be under 
scrutiny to tempt officers to track them, violating motorists privacy nor citizens. It would also deviate from time 
officers could be using to track criminal activity and apprehend suspects. It would also allow for more time with 
the officer's eyes on the APRL database instead of the road.   
    
28  Being a victim of stalking. Having my location available for public record for a very long period of time.   
29  Everything about it. This doesn’t belong in a freedom-oriented democracy. It feels like a surveillance state. It’s a 
matter of principle.  
30  
Retaining all images for 90 days is too long. And allowing anyone to access it is an absolute invasion of privacy. 
Only implement this after you have become able to determine whether a plate matches one of concern within 3 
minutes. Then you can do it, but purge all other info every 3 minutes   
31  None.  ALPR technology is good tech for fighting crime.  
32  
Several SPD officers, still on staff, have been caught using police databases and technology to harass and stalk 
community members. This would be another technology that these officers could use for stalking and 
harassment.   
33  
Well if I had to choose one glaringly disturbing concern i could choose out of several, it would be our government 
making it even easier for violent and dangerous predators access to such a data rich archive consisting of any 
persons usual routes, places of business, children's school locations, and place of residence and all they would 
need is to have the victims license plate number. This should horrify any human with a 4th grade reading level.   
34  Just put on brown shirts, it’ll be faster   
35  It's unacceptable for SPD to retain license plate images for any durable period of time.  
36  Police accessing records off duty.  
37  I actually wanted to comment that this technology has helped local police to recover my '91 honda twice now and 
I am very much in favor of it.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 35 
 
38  
That this information will be improperly used by individual malign actors in Seattle Police to target innocent 
people the officer has a bias against.   
  
The this information will be used systemically by the Seattle Police Department to establish a surveillance system 
that tracks people without reasonable suspicion or probable cause, and that this would result in a violation of 
people’s fourth amendment right to privacy.   
39  
This is a constitutional issue. A citizen should continue to have the right and privilege of travelling freely without 
worrying about data collection or intrusion of this right. Unless a person is violating laws, then a citizen should be 
able to travel freely. Otherwise, this butts up again many violations of constitutional freedoms.   
40  Concerns that this could be easily be abused, both by public inquiry (through public information request) and by 
the SPD itself.  
41  
I have many concerns, several around the potential for abuse of this system.  
- It sounds like any license plate can be stored and tracked, meaning abusive people will be able to track their 
targets through public records requests. There needs to be strict limits on deleting data timely. The 90 day limit is 
far too high.  
- Why are we allowing collection of license plate numbers that aren't connected to any crime? This should not be 
allowed.   
- I'm wary in general of increased surveillance. I'm not convinced this would even be helpful in solving crimes right 
now.  
- I think we need more privacy in general. This will mean one more entity tracking our every move.   
- Cops are fundraising to do genetic testing, and we want to spend public money on something like this. We know 
genetic testing works, so let's be thoughtful on how we spend our money! Spend it on something that works. 
(https://www.king5.com/article/news/crime/seattle-police-foundation-crowdfunding-dna-testing-cold-case/281-
0a1c7cdb-1f9f-4395-91f9-fdc2068d5113)  
- I think this is too expensive. Cops are expensive already!! Can we make them more economical? I would prefer 
the city council spent more time addressing that question.   
- I live near a police station. I imagine I'm already getting tracked. It would be nice if we had safeguards on this, as 
I'm not a fan of being tracked. Please consider that instead of expanding the use of this technology!   
42  Privacy. Personal intrusion.  
43  
As an information security engineer, privacy and data security. I do not trust anyone to store this data. I believe 
this is also a general invasion of privacy and I am strongly against mass surveillance. I do not even trust the city to 
properly control access to the data set and prevent abuse by city employees.  
44  
Automatically scanning license plates and making the data available for 90 days (or any length of time) is a 
significant breach of public safety and privacy. Once the data is available, there is no 90-day limit: parties 
interested in the data will scrape it regularly and keep it/sell it in perpetuity. The data will also be used by for 
personal, political, and other reasons to target and track public figures, individuals (like spouses, significant 
others, children) to stalk, harass, and commit crimes, such as abducting children subject to custody disputes.  
45  Big brother  
46  
Surveillance is stalking. Stop it. Police already have too much power. We certainly don’t need them stalking us. 
You know this will be used on communities of color, ex girlfriends or wives, in retaliation for complaints, etc. This 
is not a slippery slope but a landslide, destroying our freedom of movement. Next: see Hong Kong.  
47  This is an unprecedented expansion of surveillance of the people in Seattle. It is warrant-less in both a legal and 
moral sense. It serves no purpose in line with its risks.   
48  Gathering of surveillance data on people unconnected to crimes and police overstep.  
49  Misuse, hacking.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 36 
 
50  
The database this technology will compile (and the fact that SPD is allowed to hang on to this data for 90 days) 
can be easily exploited by police officers and the general public (via public records requests) to surveil anyone in 
Seattle, regardless of any law being broken or reasons to suspect a law will be broken. This seems like a violation 
of our civil right to privacy in our daily travel around the city.  
51  It's unconstitutional 'big brother' surveillance.  
52  Office of Police Accountability investigations have already shown that the SPD has abused this technology to track 
citizens for personal/non-crime related reasons  
53  
How long data on scans of license plates not on any hot list/non-hits are stored. 90 day retention policy is way too 
long, it creates a rolling 90 day map of where & when every car in Seattle was. This data can be requested by 
outside parties including law enforcement agencies in different states & private parties to create databases/maps 
showing where & when every car was in Seattle for much longer periods. Data on non-hits should not be retained 
beyond the few seconds it takes to check a license plate number against hot lists. There is no value in storing 
information on non-hits. And, there is no legitimate argument that it takes longer than a few seconds to check 
whether of not a license plate is on a hot-list.  
54  I have no concerns, it will help reduce crime  
55  
Privacy. I do not need the Seattle Police tracking my movements and keeping that information in a publicly 
available database. Trust. The Seattle Police cannot be trusted with this information. As you might recall, they 
were placed under federal supervision because they are unable to uphold our constitutional rights. 
Accountability. The Seattle Police oppose accountability.  
56  
This is an incredibly irresponsible system with vast potential for misuse and by SPD’s own data has extremely 
limited investigative use. Only .2%-1% of license plates can be tied to an investigation while the remaining 99%+ 
have nothing to do with an investigation and can be publicly queried. This is incredibly irresponsible and 
ineffective policing. I oppose the use of this technology entirely and find the data security policies laughably 
naive.   
57  
Ninety day retention of data especially for vehicles that didn't match any crimes at the time of scanning is a 
massive privacy violation. Other states require data on scanned plates that don't match to be deleted within 
MINUTES of the scan, not retained for months available to anyone. Members of the police force have regularly 
used data access for abuse of intimate partners for example, never mind people in the public doing PDRs and 
using the data abusively.  
58  further increasing our dystopian police state  
59  Police state invasion of privacy by a fascist, racist right wing institution we call SPD.  
60  Privacy. This amounts to location tracking of most people who have cars  
61  I have no concerns about the use of this technology  
62  
A publicly (or privately, given SPD's bad apples and their track records) database of all license plates, even those 
uninvolved with a crime that extends back three months is a massive privacy concern. SPD seems hellbent on 
acting as the security force for a futuristic dystopia where all members of Seattle society are tracked and traced 
"just in case". Not to mention this is what I imagine will be a taxpayer burden when the council just pushed 
through ShotSpotter. This kind of expansion of the SPD's power can only end in tears and bloodshed.  
63  Retaining license records for all drivers even when unconnected to a crime is a severe invasion of privacy. 
Especially considering anyone can obtain the records. I dont want to live in a surveillance state.  
64  Reasonable and trustworthy oversight of police using it  
65  Overreaching surveillance with no warrant or due cause  
66  I have privacy concerns that my data will be stored and mishandled.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 37 
 
67  Invasion of privacy  
68  
I am concerned that it will make everyone capable of being easily stalked and targeted, by government agencies 
or literally anyone.  The domestic violence concerns alone are staggering.  This will make it easy for abusers to 
stalk their victims. This technology will literally kill people when abusers can so easily track their victims.    
69  No major concerns, I think something like this should have been implemented long before now.  
70  
I have significant concerns about the use of this technology and the way in which it could allow for tracking of 
residents. Data about where I go or frequent could be available as part of the public record and I'm concerned 
about lack of training and oversight on how that data is accessed or used.  I live in a highly patrolled area and also 
think it could disproportionately collect the data of me and my neighbors compared to areas that have less 
parking enforcement or law enforcement presence. As a young woman, I'm also concerned about anyone being 
able to track my movement without my being aware of it.   
71  
This technology logs and retains information about license plates for far too long. This information should be 
purged immediately for plates not immediately determined to be connected to a felony or stolen vehicle. I'm 
concerned that the privacy implications of this technology and potential for misuse outweigh the marginal 
benefits that might come from recovering stolen property or resolving other criminal activity. I'm also concerned 
that this technology can be accessed by police and via public information requests. This technology should only 
be used by organizations with a high amount of public trust, and used in a way that does not degrade the amount 
of trust between citizens and SPD. That trust has been severely undermined between the public and SPD, and has 
warranted federal oversight of the department. Recent reductions of that oversight does not immediately 
increase the level of trust between the public and SPD. Eventual misuse of this technology (as with other police 
databases with documented abuse cases) will contribute to further erosion of trust between SPD and the public.  
72  
The ability for someone to access recorded location data from the last 90 days just by asking. why the fuck should 
someone random be able to know where i’ve been? do you not understand that this puts people at risk of 
abusive ex partners and enables stalking? Additionally, police officers should not be able to access peoples data 
when there is no evidence they have been part of a crime or broken any laws. this greatly increases the risk of 
abuse of the system by officers   
73  
Any increase in number of these surveillance devices must be met with far stricture retention rules. No non-
interesting license plate data should be saved more than 48 hours PLUS department data access should require 
approval with reports on who requested access to what available to the public and media after a short amount of 
time.  
74  
It is a huge overstep for the police department and also opens up personal safety and security concerns for 
citizens. Anyone in the public can request info from the police department based on a license plate and use that 
info for things like stalking and harassment.   
75  Surveillance tech doesn’t make us safer. And SPD has no proven history of ethically and safely handling sensitive 
non-criminal data for even short periods of time.   
76  The costs in terms of privacy invading surveillance are much greater than the perceived benefits. It's also a 
misguided approach to ensuring safety  
77  The long length of time that passive data is retained and available to the public with no guardrails to make sure 
the general public safety is protected.  
78  
I am deeply concerned about expanding police surveillance over those who aren't even suspected of a crime. 
There is no benefit to holding this data on non-suspects, and many other states and cities use license plate 
recognition technology without storing non-criminal plates. There have already been documented abuses of this 
system by SPD officers.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 38 
 
79  
The proposed expansion is an overreach and a big step toward the imposition of a surveillance state upon the 
people of the United States. The problems with this sort of expansion of surveillance have already been proven 
and well documented.   
  
The American Civil Liberties Union, digital privacy advocates, and researchers at the University of Washington’s 
Center for Human Rights have raised concerns about keeping such detailed vehicle location information on 
people not associated with any criminal activity.  
  
Office of Police Accountability investigations give plenty of examples of how SPD officers abuse police databases. 
In 2021, an SPD officer used these systems to track his ex-girlfriend's new boyfriend. In 2020, an officer accessed 
information about an ongoing domestic violence investigation and possibly shared that information with one of 
the people involved. Early this year, another officer searched whether a suicidal family member had any 
registered firearms. UW researchers raised concerns about how ALPR data could be used by federal agencies to 
track undocumented immigrants or by other states to track those coming to Washington to seek abortions.   
  
Beyond what governmental agencies can do with the information, literally anyone can access this data through a 
public information request. Someone can request all SPD ALPR data from the last 90 days and if they know your 
license plate number, track your location. So, even if you believe in the trustworthiness of SPD, the federal 
government, or the protections Washington put in place sheltering people seeking abortions, you might consider 
whether you trust just an average person, or an ex-partner, to be able to request and access this data.  
  
This is all terrifying, and we the people are strongly opposed to this proposed regression in our liberty.   
80  
I am deeply concerned at the erosion of privacy, the expansion of pointless surveillance, and the already-proven 
harm potential for allowing poorly-supervised and unaccountable police officers access to information that allows 
them to track members of the public, even those involved in no investigation and no crime.  
  
This technology has already been seriously abused by officers who use it to spy on their intimate partners - those 
officers are still on the force, safeguards have not improved, and officers can rely on nothing more than a brief 
suspension even for serious betrayals of public trust. Lacking true accountability for misconduct, limiting police 
power is the only way to reduce harm to the community.   
  
Seattle Police have demonstrated, year after year, even under the consent decree, that their methods and tactics 
are abusive and disproportionately aimed at communities of color. This technology would kick open the door for 
increased dragnetting, improperly targeted investigations, and traumatizing stops of Black, Latin, and Indigenous 
people.   
  
I strongly oppose the expansion of this surveillance.  
81  The police have more than sufficient means of surveilling people. This just reinforces their general tendency to 
treat private citizens as de facto criminals.  
82  
this technology would enable draconian surveillance by police department, who have a long history of abusing 
the people who live in this city. The SPD has historically abused access to private information that has been given 
to them, and faced very little repercussions. Giving them more spying technology will not make anyone who lives 
here safer, but will send a clear message to the police that the harm they do to the people that live in this city is 
fine and they should keep it up.  
83  
I’m concerned that through freedom of information requests, someone could track my whereabouts. I’m 
concerned that through internal access, government officials with personal reasons could track my whereabouts 
when I’m not associated with any crimes.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 39 
 
84  The police have generally proven to be irresponsible with public data and tracking, and I don't trust that they will 
be good stewards of this additional power and information.  
85  
This is a terrible violation of privacy. I understand the desire to automatically capture license plates in order to 
determine if a car is on a "wanted" list, but maintaining that data for up to 90 days for cars which are NOT on that 
list is a direct violation of privacy and a terrible idea. Bad actors can use this data in order to track movement of 
people (cars) in a scale that is dangerous. It is naive to think that not linking a license plate number to a person's 
DOL record will preserve privacy in any meaningful way, especially if a bad actor is targeting an individual (who 
they most definitely can find out their license plate).  
86  
I cannot overstate how concerned I am about this technology and how opposed I am to increasing surveillance to 
any degree on the people of Seattle. Tracking and storing this information is a huge a privacy violation by the city 
and its police department, and the proposed system additionally opens a wide gap for abuse. There are already 
documented cases of police officers abusing this system to stalk people in their personal lives, and collecting and 
storing more data only enables this further. In addition to abuse by the state and police officers, the fact that this 
information, which should not be collected and stored in the first place, is publicly available, means that anybody 
with ill intent can track a person or people’s location. To state it clearly, I am strongly opposed to this surveillance 
technology, do not believe it should be adopted at any scale, and in fact believe that it should be removed from 
the vehicles that already have it.  
87  
"ALPR data is gathered indiscriminately, collecting information on millions of ordinary people.  
Law enforcement agencies have abused this technology. Police officers in New York drove down a street and 
electronically recorded the license plate numbers of everyone parked near a mosque. Police in Birmingham 
targeted a Muslim community while misleading the public about the project. ALPR data EFF obtained from the 
Oakland Police Department showed that police disproportionately deploy ALPR-mounted vehicles in low-income 
communities and communities of color.  
  
In 1998, a Washington, D.C. police officer “pleaded guilty to extortion after looking up the plates of vehicles near 
a gay bar and blackmailing the vehicle owners.  
  
Police officers have also used databases to search romantic interests in Florida. A former female police officer in 
Minnesota discovered that her driver’s license record was accessed 425 times by 18 different agencies across the 
state.  
  
In addition to deliberate misuse, ALPRs sometimes misread plates, leading to dire consequences. In 2009, San 
Francisco police pulled over Denise Green, an African-American city worker, handcuffed her at gunpoint, forced 
her to her knees, and searched both her and her vehicle—all because her car was misidentified as stolen due to a 
license plate reader error."  
  
Source: Electronic Frontier Foundation  
https://www.eff.org/pages/automated-license-plate-readers-alpr  
88  
The use of this technology has already been abused by SPD officers for personal matters; why in the world would 
you expand it? More cameras are not going to solve any issue with crime, and you are deluding yourselves if 
that’s what you believe.   
89  Privacy. Non-hot-list records should not be retained at all.  
90  Privacy, abuse of information by the police.  
91  This technology is a blatant breach of our right to privacy. This data has been used for illegal tracking of citizens 
by the government & police, & can be used by private citizens to track one another to a dangerous degree.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 40 
 
92  My concern is how it will be used against innocent citizens. There are instances where it has been used 
unethically and human behavior when surveliance like this is available will make this hard to control.  
93  
It's and invasion of privacy , its a form of predator stalking  
SPD is not a trust worthy organization   
Civilian's can access this same information and that is dangerous    
94  Where will the data be stored? Any member of the public can access this data. This opens people who have 
stalkers up for abuse. What about the domestic violence victims?   
95  
I have many concerns: first of all, how is the data going to be protected so it can't be tied to people? Also, if other 
departments can delete the data instantly, why can't SPD do it and why do they have to have it for 90 days? Why 
is so much of privacy...about parking enforcement, what does outweighs the violent crime reduction for asking 
the entire city to give up privacy? Most of the people with parking tickets/parking enforcement are poor, people 
of color, and are policed disproportionately, this would just recreate those systems, and create even more 
disproportionate policing towards poor people/bipoc. How will SPD make sure the data is not used by ICE? Seattle 
is within 200 miles of a border...it says only officers who are trained how to use the automated license plate 
readers will have access to this info, but also, it says every SPD officer will be trained to use it...so basically the 
entire fleet, this is contradictory.     
96  
This is an inexcusably invasive violation of every citizen's right to privacy.   
We do not deserve a police state with active government surveillance.   
This puts each of us at risk of falling victim to stalkers and domestic terrorist groups.   
SPD has repeatedly shown themselves to be untrustworthy with public data.   
This will rob funding from necessary community services without providing any public benefit.  
97  
I have concerns about the fact that this technology will save license plate data for 90 days, documenting days, 
time, and place that is accessible by any police officer, or anyone through a public records request. That is a 
privacy violation. The vast majority of people are not committing crimes on the road, collecting and making 
available this data to the public could easily be abused by people. An ex partner could use this data to track 
someone, an abusive family member could use this data to track.   
98  Mass surveillance and invasion of privacy for no concrete benefit. Massive cost to the taxpayer with no guarantee 
of additional safety.   
99  This will make things even more dangerous for victims of abuse and dv!!  
100  
I agree with all of the concerns here: https://www.thestranger.com/cops/2023/12/05/79293457/seattle-police-
department-pitches-dramatic-expansion-of-vehicle-surveillance  
  
It’s too invasive. The plates that are fine should be purged right away like other cities do. Or not saved at all, just 
run the plates against the list and only save plates that are a hit.   
101  
I am seriously concerned about warrantless and irresponsible searches of civilians. Given that at least 40% of 
police officer families experience domestic violence 
(https://olis.oregonlegislature.gov/liz/2017R1/Downloads/CommitteeMeetingDocument/132808), the likelihood 
of this tool being misused to harass and abuse innocent women and children seems high. Also, considering that 
the only accountability mechanism seems to be an internal review, I don't expect many officers to face significant 
consequences for inappropriate or illegal use of this technology.  
102  
This technology is extremely concerning to me. The implications for personal privacy far outweigh any 
investigative benefits of this technology. Complaints have been made about SPD officers misusing this technology 
which is a great concern. I do not believe this techology will be beneficial for keeping us safe in Seattle and will 
only contribute to the continual eroding of our privacy by expanding surveillance.  
103  Stalking! If anyone can request the license plate info for any time for 90 days, so many women will be at greater 
risk of domestic violence.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 41 
 
104  
No concerns with this technology.  Driving a 2-4 ton car/truck is a privilege and should be treated as a privilege 
with no expectation of anonymity.  Especially given the horrific damage they cause and the ability to use them 
ways that put others at risk and subvert the law.  Cars need to be monitored as drivers are often awful.  Poor 
drivers compel SPD to use Automatic License Plate Readers (ALPR), which take pictures of license plates and 
records the date, time, and location of the plate.  If someone wants to be anonymous then they shouldn't be 
driving.  
105  It will be used to violate privacy, regardless of claims by SPD. There are no safeguards in place.  
106  Rampant privacy violations both by the PD/city and the general public through FOIA requests.  
107  None; I encourage it.  
108  
The use of this technology, if at all, should be strictly limited to reading license plates that are known to have 
been associated with a crime.   
  
The wholesale collection of this data and 3 month retention is a blatant invasion of privacy and power grab by a 
department which has proven time and again to be corrupt, fraudulent, and dismissive (at best) of constituents' 
best interests.   
109  I don't like the idea of tracking all vehicles even though they are not connected with any criminal activity. Too Big 
Brother  
110  It violates privacy rights  
111  
There is little public benefit to mass surveillance, and it comes with a significant public cost in terms of potential 
for violations of privacy. Just one example: a system like this would enable officers with malign intent to better 
track the location of estranged partners and enable stalking.  
112  This is a grave violation of personal privacy.  
113  I don't want cops or trolls to have more tools with which to bully.  
114  This is going to make it so that people can see plates of women fleeing red States to access what should be 
perfectly legal care, & is in our state, but not theirs. This will put 1000's of vulnerable women at risk.  
115  
I have many concerns about this technology. Seattle has repeatedly shared their absolutely distrust in SPD, and 
having a tool like this will only further cement the lack of trust. The people of Seattle deserve to walk around their 
city without feeling like they’re watched by the city/SPD. This technology, as many things implemented by SPD, 
will be used as a tool for discrimination against BIPOC and houseless folks.   
This technology makes Seattle feel much less safe and welcoming.   
116  It is a gross abuse of policing and via surveillance and will only serve to gather data that is either worthless or ripe 
for abuse. So the only people who will benefit from it is those seeking to abuse it.   
117  
Several concerns. Perhaps if the ALPR was limited to only being used to check against "any license plate numbers 
that have been uploaded into the onboard, in-vehicle software system," as described in section 1 of the ALPR 
Executive Overview, the invasion of privacy would be a reasonable trade off. However, it doesn't do that. It stores 
the data it gathers for 90 days. The cited reasons for this technology is for stolen cars and Amber alerts. How is 
retaining this information that one would need to act immediately on for 3 months a good idea? Having that data 
stored so long also opens up other issues. Even leaving aside the issues of SPD employees having access to this 
database and  using their credentials to search out things personally relevant rather than related to their cases, as 
has already happened, there is still the greater concern of sharing with other law enforcement agencies. 
Washington has become a haven for those seeking abortions and otherwise exercising their reproductive rights, 
but this is increasingly illegal in other states. 90 days of retained footage for more and more records of license 
plates sure seems like a lot of information that could lead to the persecution of people in their home states.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 42 
 
118  
My two main concerns are   
1. The fact that SPD can not use or purge the data in a timely fashion.   
What is the point of collecting it in real time if you can't use it quickly? At what point does the gathered 
information become useless since the vehicle is long gone? Why does it take SPD longer to use and purge than 
other jurisdictions?   
It seems like there is inefficiency in the SPD if they can not gather and respond like other localities can and adding 
more data to the mix will only bog things down. It is a waste of money, resources, and time, especially when 
considering that the use of the data does not significantly increase the crime solving rates.  
2. The information can be requested by the public.  
There are inherent risks with allowing this data to be accessed by public entities. The move to a surveillance state 
is concerning, especially with all the current uncertainties with civil and healthcare rights. The fact that other 
states have laws regarding women's healthcare that can bring civil suits and jail time, the ability to locate and 
monitor persons moving around in WA state is a HUGE privacy issue.   
Racial, gender, and sexual tracking is a real concern.  
Knowing that there are "bad actors" that will use this information for their own purposes, and also knowing that 
the technology does not provide a significant amount of benefit in helping to solve crimes, it is only useful to 
those that want to track and surveil others.  
  
In addition to my main concerns, the costs of installing and maintaining this technology could be used in some 
other capacity that would be more useful. Training, recruitment, etc are some areas that come to mind.  
The only benefit would be that the officers don't have to do anything while driving around.  
119  
If this database is made public, stalkers and abusers will be able to search for their targets by license plate, 
identifying their locations at certain days and times, even if they don’t know the person or know their name. This 
is an obvious increase in risk and danger to the public.  
120  This expansion is a solution in search of a problem, since the # of license plates identified with a crime is less than 
1%  
121  
I have MANY concerns about the use of this technology. SPD has already had numerous, documented incidents of 
police misconduct around license plate and other surveillance technology — this tech would only expand the 
abuses of power. The privacy and civil rights infringement is too much to bear. As a Seattle 
resident/voter/worker, who comes from communities most targeted by these kinds of surveillance, I absolutely 
oppose this tech being used at all, much less expanded.   
122  
Overreach.  
Data Retention FAR too long.  
Massive cost with no ROI.  
Stalking (by Police AND Citizens)  
Mission Creep (always happens).  
Data Security which has been stated will not exist.  
123  
This technology should be prohibited; ALPR retaining data is a significant privacy violation even in its current 
limited use. Dramatically expanding the use is a terrible idea that will result in less privacy for millions of people. 
This program should not be expanded, and data should be purged immediately. Even without abuses by the 
Police department, the availability of this data via public records requests makes it extraordinarily troublesome.  
124  
I understand and appreciate the benefits of running plates to catch felons and recover stolen cars. What I object 
to is being subject to constant surveillance with my location logged in a database for 90 days. If the police has a 
list of stolen plates, it's fine to scan for them at the time of capture (or at most, within a day). The database is the 
problem. I cannot be free and safe in a city that tracks and logs my movements. That's dystopian and scary. It 
would be a dangerous violation of our privacy.  
125  None   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 43 
 
126  
Misuse of data, tracking of individuals based on their license plates for non law enforcement activities. The very 
small percentage of data that is at all useful to law enforcement, compared to the large amount of harm that 
could be done to someone in an abusive, controlling manner.  
127  Privacy violations, misuse, data breaches.   
128  
All concerns. Concerns for those who are being stalked, concerns for those who have dealt with domestic abuse, 
and concerns for anyone. This technology is unethical, and police do NOT need this data. I don't think 
infrequently about how this data may even help cops - who, statistically, commit domestic abuse at much higher 
rates than the general public, stalk their own former or current partners.  
  
This is a privacy and ethical violation. If this is signed off, you can guarantee that none of the co-signers will have 
my endorsement or vote moving forward.   
129  
ALPR devices present significant privacy and equity concerns while showing little efficacy in reducing crime. For 
specific civil and human rights threats posed by this technology, see a 2022 report by the University of 
Washington Center for Human Rights, "Who's Watching Washington?" 
https://jsis.washington.edu/humanrights/2022/12/07/whos-watching-washington/  
130  tracking civilians will be abused, waste of money  
131  It is overreaching and would document the lives of those not suspected of crimes which is a violation of our rights 
as US and WA citizens.  
132  Seattle Police has a long history of a use of power,  keeping data on non suspect vehicles more than 48 hours is 
unreasonable and should be banned!  
133  I worry about the overuse of public surveillance posing more risk to people than helping them.     
134  
The local publication The Stranger explains my views on this issue : “However, SPD also retains license plate 
numbers that don’t register as a “hit” on the hot list. Given that ALPR can collect tens of thousands of license 
plate images in 24 hours, and that SPD would roll out the technology to all of its patrol cars, officers have a high 
probability of capturing an image of the average plate at some point. Photos of those plates, as well as the time, 
date, and location, go into a database and SPD keeps that data for 90 days.”  
  
This is a massive surveillance issue and is unnecessary. You should focus on working with community orgs and not 
wasting your funding on technological surveillance! The ACLU of Washington has also noted similar issues with 
this technology.   
  
Instead of spending money on this tech, you should train your officers better so they don’t run over and murder 
pedestrians, and then make poor jokes about it after!   
135  
There are insufficient controls over this data to ensure that it can't be abused by SPD personnel, divulged 
inappropriately to third parties including members of the public, or accidentally leaked. This would never pass 
muster in any corporate data compliance discussion, as this represents linkable information that has significant 
privacy implications (even outside the hands of law enforcement) that merits equally significant safeguards that 
do not exist in this proposal. Those protections must come first.  
136  
I would want to make sure that the public that requests information is tracked or vetted. Could someone use the 
public request to stalk their girlfriend? (Also wouldn't want the police to use the tool internally for non-case 
related things, so would track who checked what and when)  
137  
Data retention, even for 90 days, introduces the risk of the records leaking or being improperly accessed. That 
access could be used improperly to stalk or harass drivers who are observed this way. One example is a spouse of 
a police officer whose plate might be scanned near a medical facility or a lawyer's office without their spouse 
being aware.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 44 
 
138  
Serious privacy concerns. If anybody can trace someone’s movements this exposes people to danger from 
stalkers and abusive ex partners. The police have no need to keep this information and it is a severe breach of 
citizens expected right to privacy   
139  
This is a terrifying expansion of government surveillance well beyond any reasonable grounds. Creating a 
mechanism to track individuals, especially those who are completely innocent, is a threat to the safety of our 
people and democracy.  
  
There are countless examples of perfectly legitimate actions that could lead to harm if they were tracked. Some 
states are outlawing abortions, including people who get out of state abortions. This data could be abused by 
those governments to prosecute their people. It could also be used to track protestors, etc. It could similarly be 
abused to stalk someone, etc. This abuse could happen either by someone with inside access, or someone 
performing a FOIA request.  
  
It's a massive invasion of privacy. It also sets the norm for this, and makes future decisions easier to justify, 
because they're already doing it here. We need to stop it before it happens.  
140  I don't have any concerns  
141  
SPD has a documented history of misuse of the license plate scanning technology, this will only become more 
likely as the data set grows. The proposed limitations and restrictions have not, and will not, be sufficient. Lastly, 
the problem space supposed to be solved by this is dubious at best, it clearly can't prevent or reduce crime.  
  
The budget allocated to this would he far better spent on supportive housing and other community initiatives 
shown to actually prevent and reduce crime.  
142  This is a violation of privacy. At a minimum, require deletion of the data within minutes as soon as there is no 
relevant match.  
143  This technology violates every person’s right to privacy provided under the US Constitution. In the strongest way 
possible I urge SPD that NOT impliment this policy.   
144  
Foremost that we cannot trust SPD to use this data effectively or fairly. SPD has been under a consent decree and 
has proven again and again to use racial bias and discrimination in their policing. This tech will not change that, 
and just be one more thing for SPD to abuse! And in general is my concern about privacy and the fact that we are 
becoming more and more surveilled. Surveillance does not make us safer or reduce crime, that’s a fact. Let’s use 
this money to invest in the community in ways that are proven to increase safety.  
145  This is too great an infringement on privacy, given the expansion of the technology to so many vehicles and the 
retention of the data for 90 days.  
146  
this surveillance technology will cause more harm than it will do good. instead of more resources going to 
surveillance, why don't we invest resources into things people actually need, like housing, social services, medical 
care, etc? as a community member in seattle i am completely opposed to this technology.   
147  
Why does the department need to keep the data for 90 days when other jurisdictions keep the data for only 
minutes to hours?  What protections do you have in place that prevent abuse from employees that can access the 
data?  Why should we trust that the information can't be used against civilians by other civilians through the 
public information request process considering this information would otherwise not be available for such an 
extraordinary amount of time.  Aren't you effectively presuming guilt by saying the 90 days is required to 
determine whether you have captured a significant image?  
148  None  
149  None  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 45 
 
150  It will lead to false positive and more shootings by the police of unarmed youth.  
151  
I worry SPD officers using it to illegally surveil family members, spouses and anyone else they are interested in for 
personal reasons. Even other police officers they suspect might report them.  
  
I also worry the technology makes a mistake and I am pulled over for no reason, thus putting my life at risk  
152  
I feel that this technology should not be pursued.  The data retention period for "non-hits" is too long and is 
subject to data breach events, public disclosure requests, and misuse by SPD staff, which has already occurred 
and been documented with the existing ALPR fleet.    
153  
We live in a police state already and the cops are known to be abusive. This opens up more opportunities for cops 
to be abusive. This isn't going to have tangible effects on public safety. It will just strengthen the watchful eye of 
the police state.  
154  Massive privacy overreach for those who haven’t committed crimes. Police abuse of database of information.   
155  
I am against the use of this technology.   
  
Per the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit in a GPS tracking case, United States v. Maynard, 615 F.3d 544, 
562 (D.C. Cir. 2010) "A person who knows all of another’s travels can deduce whether he is a weekly church goer, 
a heavy drinker, a regular at the gym, an unfaithful husband, an outpatient receiving medical treatment, an 
associate of particular individuals or political groups — and not just one such fact about a person, but all such 
facts."  
  
Such technology is anathema to both our innate and legal freedoms, and I urge city council to stand up to the 
military-police-surveillance-industrial complex and reject its use.  
156  
Even your own employees can't be trusted to properly use this data and not use it for their own purposes like 
stalking people they don't like, and you expect the public to wisely use the license plate information? No. Don't 
store the plate data if it's not linked to a known crime, and definitely don't make it publicly available.  
157  
I am concerned that it will capture data that is private, and make it available to third parties with no legal interest 
in the data. Per The Stranger, "not only do cops have access to that data, but anyone can request the database of 
license plate photos and numbers along with the time, date, and location of when SPD took the photo. A lot of 
cities purge this data quickly if the plate doesn't match a "hot list." SPD gave no real explanation for why it 
couldn't purge the data..." [Though I also see that the ALPR report at seattle.gov states that only properly trained 
employees will access the data, which I hope is true.] I don't understand why this technology--which apparently 
captures data at least 98% of which is unrelated to any crime--is necessary, and I certainly object to its use to 
retain said data for months on end. I am not sure how the restrictions on its use, the specific deployments listed 
in section 2.0 of the ALPR report, can be monitored and enforced. I would like to know how demonstrably useful 
the technology has been in its initial deployment, and whether restrictions have been observed. I do appreciate 
the opportunity to comment.  
158  Privacy, abuse of power on the part of police  
159  I'm concerned it will increase police power, increase police contact with the public, and increase police killings. 
I'm concerned about my privacy.   
160  This technology invades one’s privacy and makes spying on one’s neighbor possible.  
161  
Data shows us that law enforcement officers commit domestic violence offenses at high rates, allowing them the 
ability to track the locations and daily habits of people seems like a good way to let abusers keep tabs on their 
victims    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 46 
 
162  
I am concerned about retention of license plate and location information that is then subject to public disclosure 
to private investigators and private citizens with their own agendas.  Two cases illustrate unwanted 
consequences:  
  
1) Disclosure of this information could enable identification of women who have crossed into washington state 
for abortion access. Laws in other states are now criminalizing the transport of a woman for an abortion out of 
state. License plate and location information would facilitate prosecution of such women and those who assist 
them, inhibiting exercise of women's rights to protect their health and make reproductive choices.  
  
2) Disclosure of this information to private investigators working for long-term disability insurers would further 
weaken protection for the disabled who have paid for insurance benefits.  ERISA laws set a very low bar for 
disability insurers to deny insurance coverage to the disabled.  Although washington state laws now provide a "de 
novo" courtroom standard for proving disability in some cases, this still does not apply to self-insured companies, 
who are still granted a "deferential" standard under ERISA in washington.    
  
This means that the insurer can deny insurance by merely muddying the waters on a disabled person's 
capabilities for employment.  The do this by having a PI observe the insured doing ordinary things (e.g., going a 
grocery store), then claim that this is proof of employability. A database of license plates and locations would give 
them vastly more fodder for specious denials. It costs tens of thousands of dollars to disprove such specious 
claims, money that few disabled people have in ready cash.  It is also costly in distress and time that disabled 
people need for medical care and rehabilitation in the hope of return to employment.  Further, many disabled 
people get so discouraged by insurer and PI shenanigans that they do not fight for their paid-for benefits. Few 
know how to do so, or have the physical/mental/emotional/financial wherewithall to do so.  
  
Rather than believe my citizen's report, please contact an ERISA disability attorney and ask what they think PIs for 
disability insurers would do with publicly available location and license plate data.    
  
In case you are not familiar with ERISA, I'm referring to long-term disability coverage provided as part of group 
insurance plans to employed people. Generally employed people pay the premiums to protect themselves if they 
are incapacitated by disease or injury. I'm not talking about social security disability.  
  
Please consider the most vulnerable people.    
  
Please ensure that data retention is so brief that any public request for data is so unlikely to return an individual's 
license plate that a PI or abortion activist will not bother to request it.  Do not give their people another tool to 
use against the vulnerable.  
  
Please consider this both for any existing technology already deployed, not just new technology.  
163  This is a breach of privacy   
164  This is inappropriate and unnecessary. A violation of the public’s privacy and allows for cops without good 
judgement to further discriminate against mainly marginalized groups populations   
165  
I am concerned about the general privacy risks associated with storing vehicle location data for several months. I 
do not believe that citizens’ personal information (daily whereabouts) should be accessible to police without the 
police having good cause for needing that information prior to collecting it. Even if you are suspected of a crime, I 
believe there is information that could be gleaned from your day to day location that should be kept private for 
reasons of basic human dignity, especially if an individual officer’s judgment is the only barrier to accessing that 
information. Collected data should be filtered down to only that which is strictly necessary and beneficial over 
traditional police work, should be stored for as little time as possible, and should only be accessible in formats 
that answer essential police questions (eg, last known location vs location history). If technical constraints are 
cited as a reason for the current plan, more technical research, consulting or experimentation is certainly 
warranted given what is possible in plenty of other high scale software systems. Concern should also be noted for 
the general security risks associated with storing this data, which is sure to be a target for attackers who might 
profit from selling it to bad actors.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 47 
 
166  
This is a dream come true for stalkers and abusers. A public registry of locations of specific license plates, in which 
the SPD is not committed to purging noncriminal plates? What an easy way to continue victimizing anyone with a 
car!   
Keep in mind as well, that police officers themselves are far more likely to commit domestic violence compared to 
the general population; it's downright dangerous to their victims to give them free access to this kind of data.   
  
This also creates a loophole that allows, for instance, employers to get information about employees' health 
status that they are not legally entitled to. Why should employers-- or anyone, including police-- have the data to 
see that someone parks at the time and place of an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting, or at clinic offering abortion 
services, or an AIDS or cancer survivors meetup? All they need is the license plate number, which many can easily 
get when an employee parks at their workplace (or even shows up for an interview-- what a convenient way to 
maneuver around hiring discrimination).   
  
This is before considering the truly terrifying thought of the number of innocent people who will get pulled over 
and guns drawn on them just because a software misread a "1" for an "I".   
167  
This increased surveillance is intrusive to the daily lives of people in Seattle and is not even effective at addressing 
real harm if less than 1% of plates are connected to a crime. This puts too much power in the hands of the police, 
which have time and again shown they will abuse this power. This violates the privacy of individuals, and I worry 
about this being used to track people seeking abortions in Seattle from out of state. Additionally, if individuals are 
able to publicly request these, this is directly harmful to people especially in cases of domestic violence.    
168  Invasion of privacy  
169  The technology is a MAJOR privacy issue and there are not any parameters on its use and disposal of the 
pictures.  SPD has abused this technology in the past and no constraints are in place to contain the abuse.  
170  first ammendment  
171  
As a member of the state address confidentiality program (ACP), I am concerned that such a technology could be 
used to track my location for the past 90 days through a public records request without my knowledge, even 
though I am not under investigation for any criminal activity.  
172  
Overreach of power - capacity to track movements and retain info on people - high cost of this technology when 
there are other pressing needs/ social services that should be funded - the potential for abuse of this data by 
police - the potential for abuse of this data by other than police - I oppose increasing surveillance of people going 
about their day-to-day lives.  
173  It is an illegal invasion of privacy when random collection of license numbers includes non-criminals and is kept 
for 90 days.  
174  
This is a massive privacy violation. This is surveying the public without their consent and should not be tolerated. 
Without civilian oversight on how the data are stored and accessed, I am very very concerned about the amount 
of data and power this will provide SPD  
175  
When considering the adoption of any new technology, law enforcement related or not, we must think about 
how bad actors may use the technology to harm the average person or target individuals. With the potential list 
of abuses including stalking, harassment, unreasonable surveillance, and violation of privacy — combined with 
the potential positives of only 1-2% of plates actually being linked to crimes— implementing this technology does 
not pass the test. The people of Seattle would be better served by public services that improve their wellbeing 
and raise the quality of life than giving the police more tools with which they can surveil the public.  
176  This an extreme breach of public trust and the right to privacy for the general population. This technology, if used 
at all, needs to be limited. Data from this technology needs to be analyzed and non-hit data needs to be discarded 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 48 
 
rapidly. The SPD's excuses of being unable to delete images within even 48 hours when other departments and 
districts across the United States can do so within minutes goes to show how this technology can not be trusted 
in the hands of SPD. By collecting this data and holding it for months at a time and allowing it to be publicly 
available opens up more concerns with our current constant surveillance state and growing over-criminalization 
of daily life. Do NOT allow this data to be kept for 90 days.  
177  
Privacy, privacy, privacy. The retention period for this data is far too long. There is no reason to hold onto this 
data for 90 days, or really at all. In fact, there's no reason to retain the data at all. Rather, you should push license 
plate of interest to the ALPR systems in the field. They can alert when they find a plate of interest and drop all 
other plate and location data that is not of interest.  
178  That it will be used to further criminalize minoritized communities   
179  This will further escalate police violence and racism and targeting of vulnerable individuals, as a social worker this 
is unethical and will hurt the clients I serve and the people you claim to protect but actually just want to control.   
180  
Violations of privacy of everyday citizens. If this technology were to be adopted, it MUST be set up to purge its 
database of non- "hot list" license plates within a very short amount of time, one or two days max. I'm largely 
concerned about the ability of the state to track the movements of private citizens who are exercising their 
constitutional rights. Access to such information has historically always, always been used to subvert the rights of 
members of marginalized communities.  
181  
That ALPR can collect tens of thousands of license plate images in 24 hours, and that if SPD would roll out the 
technology to all of its patrol cars, officers have a high probability of capturing an image of the average plate at 
some point. Photos of those plates, as well as the time, date, and location, go into a database and SPD keeps that 
data for 90 days and can be made available to the public.  
182  
The concerns for the proposed use of this technology are almost too numerous to detail in this form, but I'll try to 
summarize. This technology and the proposed scope of collection and storage time for images puts thousands of 
innocent civilians at risk. First, victims of domestic violence can be located and tracked by disgruntled (and 
possibly violent) ex-partners simply by knowing one's license plate and filing a public information request. Victims 
of stalking can be similarly tracked even after moving. Washington state, and Seattle especially, is established as a 
safe haven for women seeking critical reproductive care. Other states, including Idaho, and radical anti-abortion 
groups have made clear their intentions of harassing, doxxing, suing physicians, and prosecuting women leaving 
their states in search of this potentially life-saving medical care. There seem to be no safeguards in place to 
prevent agencies in other states or random Washington residents from accessing these records. Given the 
proposed breadth of installation on SPD cruisers, anyone with a vehicle parked outside of a garage is at risk of 
these outcomes.  
183  
The proposed level of surveillance is a massive invasion of privacy and a security threat to all Seattle residents. 
The data that are not linked to a crime should be purged within 3 minutes as in New Hampshire. The data should 
not be a public record that can be used by criminals to target innocent citizens. The data has already been abused 
and the risk is only growing with the proposed expansion of the ALDR surveillance  
184  This technology represents a gross encroachment on the right to privacy and presumption of innocence.  
185  
These technologies create a pervasive state of surveillance that is easily abused, and perpetuates an adversarial 
relationship between police and the public.   
  
The burden of proof that a technology is having a positive impact on safety must be exceptionally high to warrant 
broad collection of data.    
  
In this case, if the technology is adopted, at a minimum the retention time should be minutes (as it is in other 
places), not months ( as is proposed).  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 49 
 
186  
I am very concerned about the use and expansion of ALPR technology to 300 police vehicles. Passive data 
collection that can lead to tracking an individuals movements by both police and the public through records 
requests is a danger for everyone, and especially people with stalkers, women in general, and marginalized 
groups already disproportionately targeted by the police. Building this database of peoples license plates who just 
pass by a police vehicle and without knowing their data is being collected/stored in this way is a major privacy 
violation and further severs any sort of community trust in the police. Allowing this expansion also paves the way 
for even more dangerous automatic and AI-assisted surveillance technologies that might do the same passive 
data collection, using facial recognition etc, and again actively making the general public less safe and collecting 
personal data without the persons consent. Waste of city funds to expand this technology's use.  
187  
I’m concerned about the expansion of surveillance of everyday citizens who pose no threat to community safety. I 
oppose the further militarization of police forces across the country and am deeply disturbed by this practice 
being funded, implemented, and expanded largely with money extracted from the very civilians you wish to 
“track” through tax dollars. I refuse to pay for my own surveillance and the surveillance of everyday citizens.  
188  
Data gathered by state and local law enforcement is accessible to both law enforcement from other states, and 
federal immigration enforcement agencies, through interoperable databases. Research has shown that by tapping 
into vast reservoirs of personal data offered up by private data brokers, ICE is able to effectively bypass 
'sanctuary' cities. While law enforcement claims to be using this data to solve violent crime - even promoters of 
this technology admit that only a small percentage of scans—typically less than a fraction of one percent—turn 
out to be relevant to public safety concerns. The ACLU estimates that less than 0.2 percent of plate scans are 
linked to criminal activity or vehicle registration issues. SPD claims their primary concern is to stop crime and 
disorder. How can they possibly claim this when 0.2 percent of plate scans are linked to criminal activity. 
Especially because this license plate information would be available for 90 regardless of whether or not the 
license plate is connected with any crime - I worry about how it might be used by immigration officers, might be 
used by law enforcement from states that have outlawed abortion to track individuals traveling to Washington, 
might be used by violent domestic partners or stalkers (as this information is available to the public with a public 
disclosure request). In August  
2012, the Minneapolis Star Tribune published a map displaying the location, obtained via a public records 
request, of the 41 times that Mayor R.T. Rybak’s car had been recorded by a license plate reader in the preceding 
year. In these times of political vitriol it is not inconceivable that this technology could be used for nefarious 
purposes. ALPR data is gathered indiscriminately, collecting information on millions of ordinary people. By 
plotting vehicle times and locations and tracing past movements, police can use stored data to paint a very 
specific portrait of drivers’ lives, determining past patterns of behavior and possibly even predicting future ones—
in spite of the fact that the vast majority of people whose license plate data is collected and stored have not even 
been accused of a crime. I fear this will could used to curb first amendment rights. Bumper stickers can even be 
seen from the data collected. Police officers in New York drove down a street and electronically recorded the 
license plate numbers of everyone parked near a mosque. Police in Birmingham targeted a Muslim community 
while misleading the public about the project. ALPR data EFF obtained from the Oakland Police Department 
showed that police disproportionately deploy ALPR-mounted vehicles in low-income communities and 
communities of color.   
189  
The increased number of ALPR installed and used in SPD patrol vehicles poses risks to citizen privacy, including 
increased opportunity for institutional abuse, discriminatory targeting, and tracking of individuals who are in no 
way associated with the criminal activities this technology claims to prevent or reduce. Additionally, as the data 
on license plates and citizen tracking grows, so does the incentive for private companies to purchase this data and 
use it for capital gain, or for malicious hackers to steal this data for the same end. The risk of citizen privacy loss is 
too great when compared to the value of this technology in investigating criminal activity.  
190  
I have major privacy concerns for all residents, including increase in surveillance of human rights activists, 
increase in stalking, increase in racialized arbitrary police stops, and personal information to be shared on a broad 
and not very secure network that is highly hackable, racial profiling and increase in access to otherwise 
confidential information. This technology is harmful to all and does not prevent any crime or increase community 
safety in any way. This is a major overreach.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 50 
 
191  
The use of ALPR technology is a violation of privacy and safety. SPD officers have a proven history of abusing their 
access to this tracking information, and should not be trusted with such revealing info about civilians. To store 
ALPR data for 90 days provides ample insight into any vehicle's patterns and makes it all too clear what its driver 
or passengers are likely up to. It is unsafe for this data to be in the hands of cops, and it is unsafe for this data to 
be available to the public. SPD's desire to gain power via increased surveillance is unethical and is not sufficient 
justification for the use of this technology.   
192  
Firstly as SPD admitted some of the data collected can be used to track peoples location across the city. I do not 
want any government to have the capability to track the population on mass. Due to a long history of similar data 
being leaked through data breaches or whistleblowers informing the public of data about them being stored 
unnecessarily and being used to track civilians I do not have faith that this data will be used properly. It is not 
appropriate nor will it ever be appropriate for the government to set up systems that can be used for mass 
surveillance.  
193  
I feel it is a violation of our privacy.  If we have not done anything wrong, why should others be allowed to look up 
information that is personal and private. This is like "Big Brother" doing anything they want to a citizen with no 
reason  
194  Inability of community to access info when necessary and misuse and access of info by unauthorized LEO/FOP and 
other supporters/promoters of tech in LE.  Like bodycams, resisted at initiation and manipulated when suited.  
195  
The Seattle Police Department have demonstrated repeatedly a racist bias, leading to the decade-long federal 
review commencing from 2011, the repeal of the bicycle helmet law because it was being enforced 
disproportionately to Black and other darker skinned people, in addition to the murder of the likes of Charleena 
Lyles, John T. Williams, and more. Allowing this sort of technology will only give more tools to the SPD for 
intimidation of non-white communities.   
196  
Vast overreach of the surveillance state. Let us fucking exist without tracking every one of us. Especially with SPD 
officers having been found culpable of grooming, tracking their victims using police resources, and more -- this is 
TERRIFYING as a woman who lives in the city.  
197  This is an extreme violation of privacy that will do more harm than good.   
198  This technology is invasive of the privacy of residents and visitors to Seattle. The records it generates can be 
abused by anyone who gains access to them, by any means.  
199  
I am a technologist who is deeply concerned about the privacy impact of SPD's proposed expansion of ALPR 
technology and strongly opposes any plan that increases the use of ALPR systems.  
  
Under SPD's proposed use, this ALPR system indiscriminately captures and stores the locations of innumerable 
vehicles, and by proxy their owners, the overwhelming majority of which have not been implicated in any crime. 
The public benefit of ALPR systems is dubious, and when weighed against individuals' rights to privacy, 
indefensible.  
  
The location information is liable to be abused by both authorized and unauthorized actors, and on the whole, a 
huge liability for the City of Seattle's government.  
200  Storage of license plate data is too ripe for abuse.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 51 
 
201  
I am concerned about the massive expansion of violation of people's civil liberties while driving in public that is 
presented by possible implementation of ALPRs. We have a right to move freely in public without being surveilled 
by law enforcement. It's also deeply troubling that data collected via ALPRs is available via public disclosure for 
such a long period of time. It makes no sense that other jurisdictions around the country can determine whether 
an image needs to be kept in only a few minutes and SPD is saying it takes them more than 48 hours and up to 90 
days. If the system being acquired doesn't do automatic processing that would exclude images not of interest to 
law enforcement, this is also a bad investment for the City. It means that officer resources must be being used on 
evaluating images - with SPD understaffing as it is, it makes no sense to waste resources on this when there are 
much more urgent needs to attend to.  
202  
Mass surveillance. This technology scans and records the identification information of thousands of people a day, 
including geographical location of people who are involved in their day to day lives with no criminal intent and 
retains that information for 90 days. Further, it compiles it all in a database that is available to public records 
requests.   
  
This is a huge violation of people's rights to privacy in their daily lives. The right to personal privacy overrides any 
thought to the potential of "precrime." Having geographic and time information can expose a lot of information 
about people, from if they're cheating on a significant other (not a crime) to if they are going to a doctor's 
appointment.   
  
As abortion rights are under attack across the country, people traveling from out of state to receive needed 
healthcare should not have the added worry of their license plate information stored for long periods of time in a 
database that can be accessed by people in other states that are hostile to the medical procedure.   
  
Furthermore, this creates a potentially disastrous situation for people in dangerous situations such as domestic 
abuse or stalking. If anyone can access this information, even if protection orders are issued, there would be no 
way to stop a third party from potentially accessing the information and passing it along instead.  
203  
The capture and storage of license plate information is an inappropriate use of police vehicles.  
  
The capture and storage of license plate information in a form available to the public is an irresponsible use of 
police vehicles.  
  
Most surveillance technology is useful and helps someone do their job. That this would be useful is not special.  
  
What is exceptional is that this would fully enable the public to repeatedly request this data as a public record in 
order to construct a long-lasting open repository of vehicle data. Anonymizability does not change the 
appropriateness of this choice.  
  
If I have a record of this kind, I can extrapolate public behavior to a degree that no citizen should be able to 
access. When we look at whether someone should have access to data, we must ask under what circumstances 
they would otherwise be able to gather it. In this case, the answer is a network of community vehicles with 
cameras, license plate readers, and a collectively pooled repository of image data. It would be uncomfortable for 
the average citizen to know that their neighbor was constructing such a system. This technology effectively 
constructs such a system for all of my neighbors.  
204  Stored information of people who have not committed any crimes could be misused by department of public 
access.  
205  I'm concerned about the massive amount of publicly-available data on driving habits, locations, and vehicle 
information being available on 3-month rotations. I do not trust SPD to keep the information secured.  
206  
I am all the way against this this violates our civil rights and takes away some of the few freedoms that we 
actually have left in this world this violates the very Constitution that our country was built on and in no way is 
this okay or Fair  
207  
It’s incredibly privacy invasive, and the retention of data for such a long period of time is extremely ripe for abuse. 
There’s no reason license plate and location data needs to be retained any longer than for a computer to check 
whether the license plate matches a list of persons of interest.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 52 
 
208  Infringing on privacy. It is an overstretch. And we have seen when technology is in the hands of people with 
power that it is abused. Every time   
209  Waste of budget. Infrindging on privacy.  
210  The use of automatic plate readers is a huge privacy infringement. When made public through public record 
requests, the information becomes even more of a privacy concern.   
211  Police surveillance is bad. Police mainly exist to repress activists so the less information they have the better   
212  Privacy, safety and security.  
213  This is an infringement of civil rights and protection against illegal search and seizure  
214  
The people who live and work and drive through our city would be subject to passive surveillance.   
  
Those who drive frequently, such as for blue-collar delivery jobs, would be disproportionally impacted.   
  
Data, once collected, is subject to abuse, especially in the hands of SPD. There is not a need for this and it is a 
huge waste of taxpayer money.   
215  
All of them. This is a disgusting use of technology to infringe on people’s right to privacy! Give us a database of all 
cops to track in real time and then MAYBE I’ll consider not hating the guts of each and every individual pushing 
for this. Just maybe.   
216  
This is a violation of privacy and I’m deeply concerned about the ways location tracking will be used to harm 
people in the community, by both law enforcement and other community members (esp in stalking or domestic 
violence situations). This is such a waste of city money and there are other actually helpful things that our city 
should be investing in - housing, healthcare, education, community groups.   
217  
That SPD will not delete the findings soon enough. No need for spd to hold unneeded license plate numbers. Also 
studies show that it may detect very few license plates that have been involved in crime. Appears to be a lot of $$ 
with little benefit.   
218  I am concerned that this will increase surveillance of poorer communities and result in more policing for people of 
color.   
219  
I am concerned that this information will be abused by members of the public to harass and target community 
members. Because the database is available publicly, the 90 day retention policy will be easily bypassed by people 
recording and storing the data, and possibly hosting all such data on their own servers.  
220  Indiscriminate collection of data related to individual activity is unconstitutional.  
  
  
Question 2: Do you have any additional concerns about the use of 
technology (in case you ran out of space in section one)  
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 53 
 
ID  Do you have any additional concerns about the use of technology (in case you ran out of space in section 
one)  
1  
SPD needs to document the number of vehicles that will have the ALPR expansion. The old SIR and report 
from OIG states 10 or 11 vehicles but I did not see where SPD acknowledges how many patrol vehicles will 
have this tech. That's an important feature to communicate to the public.   
2  No  
3    
4  It will be abused. It is highly invasive and it will hurt Seattle in the long run   
5    
6    
7  No  
8  Cops have misused this technology in the past. They will do so again. If you give them the ability to track 
everyone, all the time, they will do it.  
9    
10  NA  
11    
12    
13  It's perpetuating a gross surveillance state, AS WELL AS being a drain on city funds.   
14    
15    
16    
17    
18    
19    
20    
21  Many.  
22    
23    
24  No  
25    
26  Invasive means. With AI there is no reason the SPD would need to keep this data.  
27  I believe that scanning a plate should be up the discretion of officers. Given the circumstances of each 
individual situation.   
28  
I agree it’s a great technology and can identify issues very quickly but why does the information need to be 
saved if no crime? This amount of information saved is a risk to my privacy and recording my location to 
anybody who requests it.   
29    
30    
31    
32    
33  
How about also giving an already shameful and abhorrent police force like SPD, who have proven time and 
again that if unchecked, are capable of depravity equivalent to that of a convicted murderer, access to 
virtually any american citizen they want.   
34    
35  SPD has made it clear that the citizens of Seattle can't trust them. Now they want to track our location in a 
publicly accessible database. This is insane and I will not vote for any Councillor who supports it.  
36    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 54 
 
37  
it feels like one of those things that could be scary, but that in order to put it to a scary use a person would 
have to shift through a mountain of data and know exactly what they're looking for. so, it feels like it's 
reasonable to require like a warrant or some other reasonable need to access this kind of surveillance, but it's 
extremely useful and should be used judiciously.  
38    
39  n/a  
40    
41    
42  Please just don't. Crime is not gonna go down in any meaningful way by this tech.  
43    
44    
45  The state wants to surveil the people to control them  
46  Also no shot spotter. Technology doesn’t work. Spend money on care for people not hunting them.  
47    
48  The police have routinely proven that any power and technology given to them will be abused. Giving them 
additional surveillance technology will be used to further erode the civil liberties of the citizenry.  
49  Divisive political rhetoric not focused on public safety.  
50    
51    
52  UW researchers have raised concerns about how ALPR data could be used by federal agencies to track 
undocumented immigrants or by other states to track those coming to Washington to seek abortions.   
53    
54    
55    
56    
57    
58  further increasing our dystopian police state  
59  Absolute waste of public funds. It criminalizes all citizens who drive.   
60    
  
61  I am not concerned about non target vehicles being recorded- as long as they are on a public street  
62  
The rise in cybercrime is also a serious concern in regards to this data, as a bad actor or other state agency 
could utilize this data with statistical models to track and trace vehicles involved in abortion access, trans 
healthcare, or protest when or if the Fed ever finds those actions worth suppressing. The FBI and CIA's bad 
history of assassinating populist leaders outside of the law is also a concern in regards to this technology -- if 
they can use this data as a portal to track 'dissidents' that will also be a travesty.  
63    
64    
65    
66    
67    
68    
69    
70    
71    
72    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 55 
 
73  Our police dept hasn’t shown themselves worthy of our trust with data tracking us and, frankly, no gov 
agency should be allowed to indiscriminately gather such data on their citizens.  
74    
75  I believe this additional tech will lead to unethical targeting of low-income, unhoused people and people of 
color. And it’s shown that less than 1% of data captured actually relates to criminal activity.   
76  SPD has repeatedly shown contempt for the city it purportedly serves that make it highly un-trustworthy to 
have access to this kind of technology  
77  
Images of license plates not linked to any crime should be purged quickly (within 48 hours).  This will protect 
safety of the most vulnerable including victims of intimate partner violence, stalking targets, and others 
whose safety is not considered when big data sets are put together.    
78  
The idea that private citizens can access this same data through a public information request is horrifying. 
This enables stalkers, violent exes, criminal tracking of potential targets, tracking of political opponents. It is 
ludicrous that SPD is pursuing this when there is such a horrific loophole.  
79    
80  
As at attorney, I have further concerns about the civil rights of accused people. I work every day with young 
people who suffer the aftereffects of being stopped by police for being 'in the vicinity' of an alleged crime or 
somehow 'matching the description' of adults the police are looking for. Often the only resemblance is race - 
as perceived by officers.   
  
My legal work is also focused on domestic violence. The availability of a trove of public records that would 
allow stalkers and domestic violence perpetrators to track their victims with collected police data is a real 
risk.   
  
This technology is poorly contained, unnecessary, and violates privacy and safety for everyone - but especially 
for our most vulnerable neighbors. Please reject it.  
81    
82  Have they caught the guy who killed Jaahnavi Kandula yet?  
83    
84    
85    
86  I am a technologist by trade and I am extremely opposed to the use of surveillance technology.  
87  
What laws are in place to protect citizens?  
What accountability is there in place for police officers' misuse of data?  
What prohibits the selling, sharing, or transferring ALPR data?   
No way to opt-out.  
88    
89    
90  Cost as well   
91    
92  
That the license plate numbers will be held for 90 days if they do not match up with stollen vehicles. Why so 
long? We're talking huge numbers of license plates being recorded. Why not work on the system to improve 
the input of stolen vehicles at that end of the process?  
93  This technology puts everyday civilians in harms way and treats everyone as criminals   
always being under surveillance is a dystopian nightmare    
94  I am a technologist by trade and strongly oppose this.   
95  The cost? What are the costs? There's not a lot of information on how much it'll cost as a one-time cost and 
then as a repeating cost. Also, this form was down for over 3+hours, will you extend the commenting period?  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 56 
 
96    
97  I am concerned that this technology monitors the public, while studies have shown that only 1-2% of license 
plates come up as "hot", not enough to store everyone's data for 90 days.   
98    
99  This will make things even more dangerous for victims of abuse and dv!!  
100    
101    
102    
103    
104  
My lingering concern is that the city will fail to use this data to protect walkers, bikers, and transit users from 
the harm that poor drivers cause.  Cars and trucks used in an unsafe manner need to be immediately 
impounded and the driver surrender their license.  Poor drivers must be taken off the streets FAST.  Poor 
drivers need to stop driving and use alternatives such as transit, biking, or walking so they understand how 
their poor driving affects others.  
105    
106    
107    
108    
109    
110  The technology is too invasive toward law abiding citizens  
111    
112    
113    
114  Yeah, it's a direct violation of everyone's right to privacy  
115    
116    
117  
Also, it's scary that a public records request could get this information as well. Not connecting the license 
plate numbers to the names they're associated with doesn't actually help that much when someone stalking 
their ex already knows the plate number.   
118  
Just don't do it. The rate of success from capturing the plates does NOT outweigh the harm that can come 
from it.  
The increase in racial, gender, and sexual violence should give you pause as this tech could be used for 
targeting vulnerable groups and individuals.  
119  See a pretty girl driving by? Jot down her license plate and use the database to stalk her digitally, perhaps to 
her home. (!) We as a society must reduce use of surveillance technology, not expand its use and availability.  
120  I lack confidence in assurances this technology expansion will not result in abuse.  
121    
122    
123    
124  n/a  
125  None  
126    
127  Deployment without ethical and privacy considerations that center those furthest from justice.  
128    
129    
130    
131    
132  If Cops keep tabs on all citizens plates then aren't we are all criminals in the eyes of police.   
133    
134    
135    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 57 
 
136    
137  Expanding police surveillance at a time when public confidence in the SPD is low is personally undesirable  
138    
139    
140    
141    
142  Access by the public, and officers for reasons having nothing to do with enforcing laws.   
143  Yes! Stalkers can acess this information, which is inherently concerning. Victims of domestic violence are also 
put at much higher risk because acess to this information is available through the fredom of Information Act.  
144    
145  This data will be required to be shared with members of the public who request it. This is tantamount to an 
invasion of privacy. This data could be used by abusers who want to track their victims of domestic violence.  
146    
147  Clearly your transparency is low to middling.  Why should we support this being rolled out to the whole 
force?   
148    
149    
150  You could spend the money on schools, parks, and libraries.  
151    
152  I don't feel Seattle should become a surveillance city, and SPD fleet-wide deployment would become a literal 
vehicle for mass surveillance.  I should be able to travel through the city without documentation of such.  
153  People shouldn't be able to look up plates that cops shouldn't have been collecting anyway. We're layering 
bad on bad.  
154    
155    
156    
157  None right now.  
158    
159    
160    
161    
162  Please see #1  
163  Yes, it is unethical to follow someone’s every move in their car for 90 days.   
164  
Yes didn’t run out of space but cannot stress enough that this is not necessary and will do nothing to improve 
public safety or police and community relationships. There is no reason to further step into police state 
functions . Currently myself and I think the public do not have enough trust in the police or SPD leadership/ 
procedures to believe that this will be used wisely or fairly or do anything to actually protect individuals in the 
community, it extends police jurisdiction, influence, and intercession into private lives. SPD is not in a place to 
carry out these intents fairly and in a way that supports public safety   
165  
Information like this can seem simple to discuss in terms of its current known uses, but it’s important to keep 
in mind that many risks arise from tough to predict queries or inferences made by bad actors with access to 
the data in aggregate or alongside other information. Decisions to store and make this info available to 
officers should be made with a longer term point of view in mind, and with the assumption that data 
breaches are highly likely in the long run.  
166  
On the whole, I foresee a software that wastes police officers' time on false positives and leads to increasing 
of police intrusion on folks' lives, with the expense falling on those whose lives are made worse! Why should 
citizens pay taxes into a software that monitors their everyday actions?   
It's already a travesty that we're wasting money on Shot Spotter, which is KNOWN to WORSEN outcomes in 
every city where it was implemented. Why would we want another money pit that makes our lives more 
surveilled and less safe?  
167  This is also a ton of money going to a not proven technology when the city is cutting funding for so many 
other things. SPD should not be able to hold the data for 3 months either.   
168    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 58 
 
169  I believe it is also a violation of our constitutional rights.  The fact that a car, where it goes, where the people 
live, what they do and who sees the information is unconstitutional.   
170  yes invasion of privacy  
171    
172    
173  Data is open to misuse.  SPD has a history of abusing their databases.  
174    
175    
176    
177    
178    
179  Why not put this money to expand a murder empire into schools and education if you want to protect the 
public?  
180    
181    
182  
There is no good reason why SPD should retain images of license plates that are not associated with crimes 
for 90 days. These non-hit images should be automatically purged within minutes or hours, as is done within 
other U.S. jurisdictions using the same technology.  
183  
The current level of ALDR with its 90 days retention as a public record is already a hazard to all Seattle 
citizens. The City should first set up appropriate systems and safeguards so that it can handle these data 
appropriately before seeking to expand the system.  
184    
185    
186    
187    
188    
189  
I am concerned about the lack of substantial restrictions on how ALPR can be used and how long license plate 
and vehicle data can be stored in SPD databases. Multiple instances of institutional abuse have occurred and 
would likely continue, as SPD officers have used ALPR data to track people in their personal lives. Additionally, 
members of the public can access this information via public information request. The vast majority of this 
data is on civilians completely unaffiliated with criminal activity, as multiple studies on ALPR have shown that 
only up to 2% of license plates captured are associated with any crime.   
190    
191    
192  Secondly there's been evidence to show that this technology is minimally effective and like any infrastructure 
it costs money. Installing this system would be frivolous and wasteful for this reason  
193  Also, if a person is a suspect and then found not guilty, why should his/her private information be allowed to 
exisit in a public place that others could use in way to hurt the person. Records should not exist for 90 days.   
194    
195    
196    
197    
198    
199    
200    
201    
202    
203    
204  Storage should be limited to 1 day and only for people who have committed crimes  
205    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 59 
 
206    
207    
208    
209    
210    
211  It costs money and every dollar not spent on housing and healthcare is the equivalent of paying people to 
commit crimes   
212    
213    
214  This is a privacy issue, an equity issue, and a spending issue.   
215  Fuck 12, fuck SPD. Stop the militarization of the police. They are a money suck and a resource vacuum for the 
city. Defund, disband, and give the money to the community.   
216    
217  Do not support the use of this technology.   
218    
219    
220  Easy for this information to be misused.  
    
Question 3: What value, if any, do you see in the use of this technology?  
ID  What value, if any, do you see in the use of this technology?  
1  
Seattle's stolen property has been escalating; I see that in SPD's crime reports. Something ought to be 
done, and ALPRs are potentially a solution. But the database does not add enough value when one 
considers the potential civil liberties threats.  
2  Very little, only like 1 percent of the images captured gets connected to a crime  
3  Very little, unless you want to encourage abuse and mistrust.  
4  None. 1% potential crime reduction is basically inert. Be better at policing, and investigating not data 
gathering. Data can be twisted to fit any narrative, good investigative work by definition can't.  
5  I get that detecting plates is useful in finding stolen cars rather than manually scanning. I don't think there 
is any reason to store that data at all.  
6  None whatsoever.   
7  Stopping gang bangers who did drive-by shootings and home invasions  
8  If I wanted to know everywhere anyone uses their car, who they are dating, and where I could go to find 
them, I'd be able to do this. Is this OK with you? Can we track all city council members too?  
9  
It will make tracking of wanted vehicles faster and easier. Fleeing suspects would have a harder time 
eluding enforcement. Parking scofflaws and people with license violations would have a harder time 
continuing to drive.   
10  
If the data were not collected and stored, I could see the utility for pinging someone to observe a stolen 
car or a car mentioned in an amber/silver alert. But as the data is collected and stored, I think any utility is 
moot.   
11  None  
12  None  
13  I see no value.   
14  Absolutely none  
15    
16  None.   
17  None  
18  None  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 60 
 
19  
Nothing, compared to the already widely utilized instant matching of wanted license plates. Collecting the 
data for later processing is the same concept as having an officer sit in every citizen’s car, just in case they 
commit a crime. Absurd violation for privacy, isn’t it?  
20  None, it does not prevent, deter or detect crimes and SPD policy does not permit vehicle pursuits so there 
will be no effect if they catch someone "in the wild".  
21  As currently implemented and given an automated, near immediate purge of records, the technology may 
be helpful in identifying "hot list" vehicles.  
22    
23  None  
24  The value is only known after a crime is committed and the need to gather information becomes clear.  
25  
I have witnessed a large increase in poor driving over the past 2-3 years: speeding, ignoring stop signs and 
blinking lights, passing in bus lanes and middle turn lanes, and ignoring roundabouts. I'm not going to 
speculate as to why this happens, but it is putting a lot of people in danger, particularly pedestrians. I think 
that if drivers were aware that their driving was being monitored, they would drive in safer ways.  
26  Frankly, none.  
27    
28  It’s great when used to catch criminals but why save the data of a law abiding citizen so that people could 
then request the info and track my locations and patterns.   
29  None  
30  I'd ing cars matched to crimes.  
31  Reduce crime and missing persons.  I'm all in   
32  None  
33  
The only value I see is adding one more of our civil liberties taken away from the FREE PEOPLES OF THE 
UNITED STATES in the name of "protecting and serving". Last time I checked, the police only have a payroll 
because our taxes pay their salary. They work for us not the other way around!   
34  The only point of this technology is to increase the reach of the surveillance state   
35  None  
36    
37  both times my car was stolen this technology helped find it within a week.  
38  I don’t. We haven’t needed this technology before, we don’t need it now, and there is not evidence that it 
helps police solve crimes.   
39  
I don’t see any value of tracking citizens who are not suspected of committing a crime, who have not 
committed crimes or are not going to commit crimes. Once again, I see this as a constitutional issue and 
potentially a crises. What’s next?    
40  
I see value only if the technology is used to be linked to a violent crime. If any other images that are not 
linked to a violent crime at the time of capture, than they are abusing the right to take these 
photographs.   
41  None!!!   
42  I'm not seeing it at all... Certainly not at the expense of privacy.  
43  I do not see value in this technology.  
44  
Automated license plate recognition could potentially be useful in exigent circumstances (Amber/silver 
alerts, etc) when time is of the essence and a person's life or welfare may be at risk. Access to systems of 
that nature should be highly restricted and use authorized and overseen by courts.  
45  Paranoia  
46  None.  
47  Well, it could enable stalkers! It will help bring about a facist state in which people in Seattle are unable to 
move surveilled. But those are not good things.  
48  I see no value in giving the police this technology.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 61 
 
49  
Enhanced public safety. Support law enforcement activities. Potentially reduce vehicle insurance 
premiums.  
  
Apprehend criminals, recover stolen vehicles, support Amber / other alerts, locate drunk/impaired drivers, 
vehicles involved in road rage, etc  
  
Pursue vehicles with no license plates or obscured plates  
50  I don't see any value to this.   
51    
52  Limited value  
53  Alerting to on matches to hot lists has value. It makes it easier for cars that have been reported stolen, 
reported to have been involved in hit-and-run, or other items to be located  
54  It will help reduce crime  
55  None.  
56  None whatsoever by SPD’s own data.   
57  Very little except the minority of cases where particular vehicles have a linkage to a person suspected of a 
violent crime but a very large number of crimes aren't violent.  
58  none  
59  Fucking none.   
60  Negative value. Even if it will help solve a few crimes. The collective bad outweighs any possible good  
61  In our current SPD staffing crisis, it is important to use tools that can assist officers.  Being able to identify 
vehicles that are stolen or have been used in a  crime will assist officers in making our city safer.   
62  
If this technology were under the purview of SDOT, and could only be accessed by a formal request 
process in the case of a crime, then I could get behind it. Making the information largely arcane or 
obscured so public requests to track individual vehicles aren't a threat to public safety, I could see this 
tech used to assist with the awful driving habits of Seattle's vehicle owners - people in this city love to 
speed and to do illegal merges and actions out on the road, and this tech could help with enforcing more 
traffic laws - I think that needs to be 100% divorced from the police, however.  
63  While it can reduce crime, data should only be retained for license plates that are linked to a known issue  
64  Tracking criminals more easily   
65  None  
66  None.  
67  None, it's truly Orwellian  
68  None. The likelihood of it producing any actionable license plates when the criteria for inclusion is “all cars 
nearby” is nil.   
69  It will be a massive assist in stopping vehicle theft, and other crimes that involve the use of a vehicle.  
70  Very little if any.   
71  Marginal benefits that might come from recovering stolen property or resolving other criminal activity.  
72  literally none lol, this has been shown to be ineffective and the long term data hold is unlikely to do 
anything helpful.   
73  For more quickly playing the license plate state game we used to play on childhood road trips.  
74  I do not see any value in collecting this data and storing it and allowing citizens to request this sensitive 
information.   
75  No value, only potential harm by SPD. We need more tech for human services, not policing.   
76  none  
77  
I see some value in this technology for helping locate vehicles associated with amber or silver alerts.  But 
as those situations are emergent and time-bound, retaining the data for 90 days and allowing anyone to 
request access to anyone else's activities poses a risk for abuse and personal safety concerns.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 62 
 
78  
There is a benefit in automatic recognition of license plates, enabling drivers to keep their minds on 
driving.  
However, there is NO reason to store plates that are not a hit.   
79    
80  None.  
81  None. There is no way in which this technology will improve my life.  
82  this is valuable technology for building a draconian surveillance state where anyone the police don't like 
can quickly and easily have their life ruined.  
83  I like that if someone is driving a stolen car or has abducted or abused a person, the police can more easily 
find them out in the world.  
84  None  
85    
86  I see no positive value in this technology, I think it is extremely harmful to the public.  
87  
Another lawsuit for Seattle / Washington state taxpayers to fund:  
https://www.eff.org/press/releases/electronic-frontier-foundation-aclu-win-court-ruling-police-cant-
keep-license-plate  
88  Absolutely none.   
89  None for anyone other than the police, which should not be our primary concern.  
90  None   
91  None.  
92  Some stolen vehicles might be returned sooner, but for this the other end of this process must be speeded 
up, i.e. when a vehicle is first reported as stolen.  
93  None  
94  None. This will only allow people who have access to this data to further abuse the system and the people 
being surveilled    
95  None whatsoever. I wish they would dismantle them for the cars that already have implemented them.  
96  According to data, < 1% of ALPR reads are connected to actual crime. There is no value in that cost-benefit 
analysis.   
97  I can see the value in that it's helpful to scan license plates in real time, it's the storing of that information 
for 90 days that's disturbing.  
98  None  
99  NONE  
100    
101  Keeping the eyes of the police officers on the road while driving so they don't kill pedestrians in 
crosswalks. Oh, wait, nevermind, they do that anyway with no repercussions. So, no value really.  
102  None really! We don't need more cameras automatically registering identifiable data about people.  
103  None! Why have a record of random plates cop cars are stuck behind in traffic?   
104  
The true value of ALRP is when it is utilized to track vehicles used in a reckless manner, to include 
speeding, running red lights, and driving in a manner inconsistent with Vision Zero goals.  The key is FAST 
consequences.  Poor driving equals car impounded and drivers license revoked immediately.  Driving is a 
privilege, SPD needs to err on the side of the safety, health, and welfare of the public - not the 
convenience of the poor drivers.  The public does not need to coddle poor drivers, consequences need to 
be immediate and procedures for re-in-statement of licenses and vehicles need to be thorough, costly, 
and painfully slow.  Poor drivers must plan on using transit/bike/walking for years before re-in-statement.  
105  None.  
106  None  
107  Reduces risk of future crime.   
108  There is no value to the public of this use of technology. The invasion of privacy associated is a significant 
rollback of the rights of Seattlies. It should be outright banned, not expanded.   
109    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 63 
 
110  None  
111  None  
112  None.  
113    
114  None! It should be tossed out completely   
115  Literally none.   
116    
117  
If the hotlist is maintained on the vehicle and the plate and geolocation information is not stored, it could 
be useful for Amber alerts and stolen vehicles, things that the officers in the vehicle would be responding 
to immediately.   
118  Not enough value.  
119  Surveillance. In the event someone uses a vehicle to commit a crime, that vehicle could more easily be 
tracked as it travels around.  
120  little  
121  
I see no value that comes even close to outweighing the costs, both financially and ethically. Washington 
is already a high recovery state for stolen cars already, and we know that law enforcement have a track 
record of using this tech improperly.   
122  Zero.  
123  There is no value in retention of this data or expansion of its use.  
124  If used to flag specific plates that are linked to a crime (with probable cause) I see the value in recovering 
stolen cars and catching dangerous felons.  
125  Arresting criminals. Tracking stolen cars. Arresting people who break the law.   
126  None.  
127    
128  None. I do not care. If cops could do their jobs in 1990 without this technology, they can do it now too.  
129    
130  none  
131  None.  
132  No value except to locate vehicles currently on the road, all data should be often and regularly purged.   
133  I don’t see any  
134  
It may help in occasional cases, but the constant mismanagement and misuse of the SPD means that they 
need to make significant inroads with the community they inhabit rather than spending taxpayer (or any) 
money on it.  
135  In the narrow case were a license plate is linked to a crime, it could provide additional insights that could 
help establish the timeline or specifics of a crime.   
136  
I see that with a reduced police force this would help solve some crimes! Would help with all the stolen 
cars lately, would help detectives that don't have time to investigate, because they're are too few of 
them.  
137  Very little; I have seen no evidence that this technology would have increased case clearance rates, and as 
it is not a preventative measure it will not materially increase public safety.  
138  None whatsoever   
139    
140  it would help identify, capture and prosecute car thieves and other crime perpetrators.  
141  None.  
142  None.   
143  Although there is value in being able to track potential kidnapping victims and stollen cars, etc, the data is 
kept for 3 months under the proposal and is available to the public. It’s violation of privacy is too great.   
144  None  
145  The only usefulness for this technology is for red-light enforcement, tracking stolen cars and speeders.  
146  i do not see the value and i do not think this technology will improve community safety or well-being at all. 
i think it will make people less safe.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 64 
 
147  If the car matches a hit list plate, sure great, but keeping the information about non-hit plates for such an 
extremely long time does not look to be gaining any significant public benefit.  
148  Getting criminals who are shooting guns everyday off the streets  
149  Significant.  Reduced time spent doing manual work which means more time for officers in the 
community.  Better ability to track nuisance perpetrators.  
150  None  
151  Cars are weapons. If they have the technology to scan plates, they should also be able to scan speed. The 
police should stop people for speeding  
152  I don't feel that the technology's value outweighs the liabilities it poses.  There is too short a path to city-
wide surveillance and too many opportunities for misuse, either by SPD, or outside influences.  
153  None or next to none. Police drive around too much anyway. Get out of your cars and engage with the 
public.   
154    
155  None  
156  Sure, it makes it easier for cops to drive safely while also scanning license plates. But why the hell would 
you store any plates that aren't connected to a crime?  
157  I presume it enables quicker flagging of problematic license plates.  
158  None  
159  I see no value in the technology.  
160    
161  None  
162    
163  None, this is fucked up.   
164  None for the police this is just extra monitoring and surveillance with potentially no public safety 
outcomes and increased risk for discriminatory stops and police responses   
165  
I can understand that being able to automatically detect when a plate which is on some list of targets is 
within view of an officer’s car. That said, I do not understand why that detection couldn’t simply trigger an 
immediate alert for the officer or the police department more broadly instead of needing to be stored in a 
historical log.   
166  Maybe cops would murder fewer pedestrians with their car and joke about it if they kept their eyes on the 
road.  
167  I do not see any value in this technology   
168  Slight value with getting license plates of perpetrators fleeing that may not get caught  
169  None.  I see it as harmful.  There are plenty of other ways to track criminal behavior and the thought this 
will be expanded and result in harm to everyone.  
170  none  
171  I do not believe the benefits of using this technology outweigh the great costs and risks to privacy.  
172  No value - all downsides  
173  It is a complete waste of tax dollars for such a tiny success rate (1%-2%)  
174  None.   
175  I see no value in the use of this technology.  
176  
This technology removes a lot of the need for officers to manually scan people and vehicles looking for 
suspicious actors and playing on the officers biases. The only benefit of this technology is that it allows 
stolen vehicles to be located faster without officers harassing random civilians, and 'time is of the essence' 
instances of kidnappings and locating vehicles involved in violent crimes.   
177  Great for things like Amber alerts and other BOLO items where immediate response is required.  
178  I can see that it will be of great value to the police department in assisting them meeting their quota   
179    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 65 
 
180  
1. If the scanner is reading plates, the cops can keep eyes on the road, and strike and kill fewer people 
with their vehicles.  
2. If the scanner is reading plates, there is less chance for human error in reading plates and mistaking 
them for "hot" ids, meaning fewer incidents of innocent folks getting pulled over for no reason.  
181  I see no value in expanding this technology to all patrol vehicles  
182  This technology can and has been used to solve certain crimes such as kidnapping, etc. But purging non-hit 
images from storage would not significantly reduce the technology's utility in this regard.  
183  If the retained data can be restricted to the less than 1% that is related to criminal offences, it will help 
prosecute crimes.   
184  It provides the punitive justice system greater speed and precision, which is not a particularly worthwhile 
goal.  
185  I perceive the value to be minimal other than making it easier for police to prejudge drivers based on 
looking up their driving records more automatically and indiscriminately.   
186  None.  
187  There is no value other than militarization and a step further towards total fascist control of the people. 
This does not sever the people.  
188  none - 0.2 percent of plate scans are linked to criminal activity.  
189  
ALPR can improve the rate at which police officers can investigate vehicles related to theft, felonies, and 
missing or wanted persons. It can make this work more efficient, and also be used to verify witness 
descriptions or identifying features of vehicles involved in these activities.  
190  None, this is unacceptable   
191  n/a  
192  This technology is very useful for mass surveillance and thus controlling population. I think it has little to 
no value within a democratic and free society.  
193  Perhaps in finding missing children  
194  Compare current upheaval regarding children and TikTok, this tech is gaming for Law enforcement easy to 
manipulate and power addictive for police.  
195  Absolutely none for public safety. The implementation of it will only deepen the City of Seattle's sense of 
being a police state.  
196  NONE whatsoever.  
197  There is no value in this technology. This is an attempt to justify the increase in spending for SPD without 
producing anything of value for Seattle residents.  
198  None that outweigh its inherent damage to privacy.  
199    
200  Comparing license plates against a hot list is a legitimate use of this technology.  
201    
202  
While there is a use for this technology in catching people involved in crime, the studies run on ALPR data 
show the actual usefulness of this is incredibly low, with some top estimates showing that just 1% of all 
vehicles scanned by the technology flagging cars with associations to crime.  
203  
If I had access to this data by public request, I would be able to construct more effective cases against 
police harrassment and targeting of citizens. It is my hope that I would, through correlation, also be able 
to infer overprofiled neighborhoods, but this would just be a nice bonus.  
204  finding people who have committed crimes  
205  I do not see how an expansion of this technology would be worth the cost to implement it (including 
purchase, installation, training, and data storage).  
206  None  
207  It doesn’t really seem useful for anything other than harassing people.   
208  None   
209  Negative value, as in, not positive.  
210  I do not see value in the technology. Police having this information makes me feel less safe, not more 
safe.   
211  None  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 66 
 
212  Obviously this could be used as evidence, placing a suspect at the scene of a crime.  
213    
214  None.   
215  
Negative value. I believe it will worsen public relations with police, specifically regarding trust and privacy. 
I absolutely do not want my vehicle being tracked by police if I have done nothing wrong. How does that 
not constitute an illegal search or seizure????  
216  Absolutely NONE.   
217  None. And studies show it does not assist police much either. Too expensive for not much benefit.   
218  I do not see any value of this technology  
219  Helpful so that officers don't have to manually enter plates and compare against a hot list. But I think the 
data should not be stored.  
220  Metadata may reveal police misconduct.  
   
Question 4: Do you have additional comments/questions re what value do you 
see in this technology?  
ID  Do you have additional comments/questions re what value do you see in this technology?  
1  
If the expansion is going to go through, then at least SPD ought to be transparent about it. If this technology is as 
great as they claim, they should have no problems showcasing evidence of their successes. That also means being 
transparent about the use of the database.  
2    
3    
4  Why would you even consider allowing this? Maybe if images deleted in 3 minutes like they do in another state. 
Maybe. Or maybe go read 1984.  
5    
6    
7  It will help pull Seattle out of its current shit-hole condition.  
8     
9  This should be used to find vehicles and people of interest but not to just vacuum up data on everyone just passing 
by.   
10  NA  
11  No, there is no value  
12  Is this a surveillance state? Can funds be used to expand staff, outreach, and public safety  
13  Only for amber or silver alerts, which would necessitate data to back up.   
14    
15    
16    
17    
18    
19    
20    
21  
What data exists to demonstrate prior deployments were worthwhile? What percentage of scans were used to 
prosecute a crime or otherwise serve the public interest? Is the current data robustly audited and if so, what 
analysis has been done (e.g. is a specific person an outlier who accesses it far more than others?)?   
22    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 67 
 
23    
24    
25  I would like to see cameras coupled with cameras  
26  There is no value in this given the statistics. It galvanizes the further existence into living in a police state.  
27    
28  Why keep all the data? What is the purpose?   
29    
30    
31    
32    
33  This will only help police secure more funding while giving a terrible tool to the most depraved of our society.   
34  Who on earth thought this was a good idea and have they ever seen even one episode of the Twilight Zone?   
35  Unacceptable surveillance  
36  Helping track crimnals  
37    
38  To reiterate, I don’t.   
39  I’d like to have a response from the PD. What is their purpose for introducing this?  
40    
41    
42    
43    
44    
45    
46  Put community policing walking neighborhoods. Know us as your friends and families not adversaries.  
47  Why are we wasting our time on this? Why aren't the people pushing this on the street dealing with crime?  
48    
49  As mentioned so many times in the media and others: abuse, misuse, hacking  
50    
51    
52  Who will have oversight on ensuring that the SPD does not abuse this technology when it gets expanded? Will that 
oversight come from an independent 3rd party? -Because it should, the SPD is not trustworthy  
53    
54  It will help reduce crime  
55    
56    
57    
58  acab  
59  It increases Seattle's budget deficit.   
60    
61  I am very glad to see SPD and the City trying new things to supplement the declining police force. And this is not 
new technology to the City just increasing the use of a technology that has been in use already.  
62    
63    
64  Overall I like it and agree with it, I just think you have to have safeguards in place to prevent the abuses from the 
past mentioned in the media.  
65    
66    
67    
68    
69    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 68 
 
70    
71    
72    
73    
74    
75  No more tech for police. Put funds toward human services.   
76  Even considering this is a misguided use of city resources  
77  Police officers have been known (nationwide and in SPD) to abuse access to databases like this.  An expansion of 
the program must involve oversight, guardrails, and protection of the public.  
78    
79    
80    
81    
82  they weren't doing their job before, and your solution is to give them more tools to abuse innocent people. You 
have failed to lock up the known criminals amongst their ranks.   
83    
84    
85    
86    
87    
88    
89    
90  Don't use our tax money to pay for this unconstitutional invasion of privacy.   
91    
92  I'm concerned about the amount of survelliance and what other crimes from the police will be used toward the 
public.  
93  Why not just train your officer to be better at there jobs   
94  Instead of wasting money on this, fix the potholes in our streets.   
95    
96    
97    
98    
99  This will make things even more dangerous for victims of abuse and dv!!  
100    
101    
102    
103    
104  Please expand Automatic License Plate Readers (ALPR), to traffic lights and lamp posts. This technology needs to 
help SPD get poor drivers off the road whether an officer is present or not.  
105    
106    
107  Please approve.   
108  Ban this technology immediately.   
109    
110  Again, no value  
111    
112    
113    
114    
115    
116    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 69 
 
117  Why exactly does the SPD need to hold onto this data for 90 days? Other places that do have this technology delete 
it after a much shorter span of time.   
118    
119  
How is this database being secured? Will malicious states such as Russia and China use the database to track 
particular prominent individuals living in Seattle whom they want to meddle with, such as U.S. Congress members? 
What if someone hacks the database and injects malicious false data that artificially and falsely places a person’s 
vehicle at or near the scene of a crime? What if they hack it to remove legitimate data?  
120    
121  
I am a person who is part of communities that this tech will disproportionately target and impact. I am appalled 
that Seattle is trying to expand this already unethical tech. I oppose it and agree with the UW Center for Human 
Rights, the ACLU, and other community organizations that oppose ALPR.  
122  I'm a Security Engineer, there isn't enough space in this form.  
123    
124  I'd rather go without the benefits of this technology than give up my privacy.   
125  I support this but only if technology is used to make arrests of criminals  
126    
127    
128    
129    
130    
131    
132  This scanning of all license plates has little to no value and is an invasion of privacy and has the potential to be 
widely abused by police.   
133    
134    
135    
136    
137    
138    
139    
140    
141    
142    
143    
144  What are the mechanisms in place to ensure this technology is not abused by SPD? What are the mechanisms to 
ensure the privacy of this data that is being collected.  
145    
146    
147    
148    
149    
150  Absolutely none  
151    
152    
153  No. This technology should be illegal.  
154    
155    
156    
157  None right now.  
158    
159    
160    
161    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 70 
 
162    
163  Nope.  
164  Same   
165    
166  N/A  
167    
168    
169    
170    
171    
172    
173  Spend your time and money real police emergencies.  
174    
175    
176    
177    
178    
179  please don’t use our tax money for this!!!  
180    
181    
182    
183    
184    
185  I would be interested to know about the concrete public safety benefits and see direct weighing of these against 
the almost inevitable abuse.   
186  No value. This technology is an active danger to the community.  
187    
188    
189    
190    
191    
192    
193    
194  Was the use and standards for this tech included in the ink freshly drying on the year past due contract? Bet a 
raindrop 💧💧 Not.  
195  
What exactly would this data be retained for? Why would it need to be retained for 90 days, a full quarter of the 
year? Could that money instead be used to improve road navigation, improve bus service, or housing? (The answer 
is yes, but where you put this money will tell the community a lot.)  
196    
197    
198    
199    
200  Storage of scanned license plates should not be permitted. The only use should be to lookup the plate in already 
existing hotlists, then the plate number shall be promptly discarded if it doesn’t match.  
201    
202    
203    
204  do not store the license plate info for more than one day  
205  
SPD officers who have this installed in their vehicle should be logged automatically every time they use it, including 
date, time, vehicle identification, and location. Data on which officers use this, how often, and where should be 
available to oversight committees and the City Attorney's office.   
206    
207    
208    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 71 
 
209    
210  Do not increase the use of this technology.   
211  Any accidental benefits of surveillance are outweighed by the fact that the same dollars could be spent on sure fire 
crime preventers like housing and healthcare   
212    
213    
214    
215  When will we have TRUE police accountability? Use this technology on the cops, not on the innocent people of 
Seattle.  
216    
217    
218    
219    
220    
  
Question 5: What would you want City leadership to consider when making a 
decision about the use of this technology?  
ID  What would you want City leadership to consider when making a decision about the use of this technology?  
1  
Do the benefits of recovering stolen vehicles match or outweigh the risks associated with misreads or high-risk 
vehicle stops alongside the privacy concerns with the searchable database? If yes, that cost-benefit analysis should 
be readily apparent to the public.  
2  At least requiring as a part of the expansion that the amount of time the data is kept is limited  
3  There is no clear benefit to the public, and massively increased risk of abuse.  
4  
Their citizens. Police are not and have never been a force for justice. They are just force. Allowing them massive 
data surveillance is about as terrifying for the public as you can get. Ultimately it will drove privacy minded folks 
away from our city and state only to help police be more lazy.  
5  Consider how badly this could be misused by police abusing their power. Consider how badly this could be misused 
for an officer to stalk someone.  
6  Privacy, security, and rights-based concerns over baseless claims made by a police force that has been a national 
embarrassment for a decade.  
7  Implement it  
8  Do not allow this to happen  
9  
There needs to be controls and oversight of who is allowed to access the data and for what reasons. No officer 
should be allowed free access to the data. The public should not be allowed access to the data without court 
allowed access to specific parts. Officers should not be allowed to search outside of cases that they are working on. 
Officers should be registered and tracked as to which data they access and for what reason.   
10  
Did drivers in Seattle agree to give up their privacy and control over their data in order to use city streets? Does this 
surrender of data not usually come with a user agreement, some indication that people know and understand their 
data is being collected? This technology has already been used in Seattle for a few years now, and I wasn't aware 
my location data was being collected!   
11  The cost of adding this to all patrol vehicles, and the lack of benefit provided. Money could be better spent 
elsewhere.   
12  Weigh the degradation of our privacy and how the technology will/can be abused   
13  It's a disgusting use of funds.   
14  Start working for the public interest  
15  
Consider that you might not want to provide an agency that already abuses your constituents with more power and 
information that can be used in abusive ways. Consider what would truly be gained by this move. Consider what will 
allow you to sleep at night.   
16  
Consider the creep in police availability to track individuals who are innocent of crimes. Consider that we are 
innocent until proven guilty and should have the right to move freely without tracking. How could this be used 
against POC especially when SPD has historically harassed and arrested marginal groups.   
17    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 72 
 
18  Consider what the money spent on this could be used for other, proven programs that actually help people and 
prevent crime.  
19  
Although there are many hypothetical scenarios that paint this technology as a silver bullet to save lives, I implore 
decision-makers to look behind the hypotheticals and question the performance of the currently implemented 
system through hard numbers today.   
20  
The current failures, consent decrees and issues that exist within SPD should not give you the rationale or 
confidence that the SPD will not abuse this technology as they have other items.  The potential benefits do not even 
come close to the risks of the usage of this technology and the city wide implementation of it.  
  
Why are they so focused on gathering this information? What use is it? Surveillance of the public at large with no 
rationale for it is the start of further erosion of civil rights and the allocation of additional power to the SPD that 
they do not need nor have the proven they have the ethical,  moral or human kindness abilities to be entrusted.  
21  
The Seattle Police Department has demonstrated not mere obstinance but open hostility to both Seattle residents 
and the rule of law. They violated chemical weapons moratoria handed down by the mayor and council, celebrated 
killing unarmed nonviolent citizens, incited panic by lying to the public, sprayed council members with chemical 
irritants, and refused to answer questions regarding abandonment of the precinct. Policies clearly cannot deter 
them from abuse. Robust automatic purging should be required for any new surveillance deployment.  
22  
The privacy of its populace, the possibility of their own data being leaked, the prior history of the SPD in failing to 
safeguard similar information. e.g. this case from 2018 in which an SPD officer stalked his ex girlfriend via a similar 
database https://www.heraldnet.com/news/investigation-seattle-cop-used-police-database-to-stalk-ex-girlfriend/  
23  DO NOT USE  
24  
Stop assuming that the police will gather information on unfaithful spouses, people going to medical appointments, 
and other irrelevant stuff.   The technology is needed to catch bad people doing bad stuff.   If you do not retain ALPR 
for the 90 day period then you should not bother paying a vendor for the ALPR at all.   The ACLU is no longer a 
relevant organization that protects peoples civil rights.   They hate the cops and will do anything within their power 
to remove any relevant technology that assists them in their job.     
25    
26  The invasion of privacy of the people of Seattle & all who visit. It might be better to spend more efforts tracking the 
explosion of crime that happens on foot here.  
27  Consider the consequences of the abuse of such a system. The working poor who drive to work at night or are 
delivery drivers in high crime areas being tracked and profiled.   
28  
I would like you to consider how it’s fair to track our movements then keep the data fire so long with no cause. The 
privacy of a law abiding citizen like myself is in danger. Everyday I’m seeing people drive erratically, speeding 
through the bus lane, passing in the center lane (through intersections) while i sit there following the rules and 
watch nothing being done. I see dozens of unregistered cars on the road every day. What about insurance, does this 
system tie in to insurance verification?   
29  Maybe for once having a backbone and not cowering to police interests and business interests over the rights of 
regular people.  
30    
31  How can it be used most efficiently  
32  Any SPD officers with credible allegations of harassment or domestic violence should be removed before anything 
like this should be considered.   
33  Consider that government was never meant to be able to peer into every aspect of our lives when nobody ever 
asked for big brother looking up everyone's skirt without even asking us out to dinner first.   
34  Consider literally anything else   
35  This should be illegal.  
36  What will help the police make our city crime free.  
37  it's this, or make it safe to park your car on surface streets in Ballard. (right?? fucking Ballard, they stole my car in 
BALLARD)  
38  That this technology is unnecessary, costly, and dangerously intrusive.   
39  Consider a citizens constitutional rights. Otherwise, this will get bigger than the counsel.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 73 
 
40  If City leadership would feel comfortable with all of their movements being tracked, and potentially compiled.   
41   Consider eliminating use of this technology by police instead of expanding it.   
42  Please do not use this tech against us - Police have proved time and again that they need to earn our trust - this is 
not a step in that direction.  
43  Seattle should not be a surveillance state. This is the garbage that countries like China do invade into people’s 
personal lives.  
44  
License plates exist as a public safety mechanism for law enforcement and other authorized parties to verify 
ownership and registration of vehicles and enforce road safety laws and regulations. They are not and were never 
intended to be a mass surveillance tool.  
45  The rights of private citizens  
46  False information. Terrorizing citizens.   
47  That SPD lied to us about the East Precinct.  
48  Consider the public’s rights to privacy and their safety from the police.  
49  
City leadership is ineffective and not the appropriate decision maker. This effort must be lead by law enforcement, 
along with an politically independent organization, to evaluate data associated with the use and misuse of this 
technology, address concerns, implement guardrails, then implement state-wide with the ability to communicate 
between state law enforcement agencies.   
50  If SPD is insisting this technology is crucial for doing their job (which I'm dubious about), then please require them 
to clear all "non-hit" data after 1 hour -- as many other cities who use this technology do.  
51  Don't do it. Don't waste the money.  
52  The untrustworthiness of the SPD   
53  What is the case for expanding the use of this technology? The rate of stolen cars getting recovered is already 
extremely high.   
54  Put it in every patrol car and at fixed locations all over the city.  
55  Why consider it at all?  
56  
Consider the 99%+ of city residents who are not involved in an investigation and may be tracked by anyone who 
queries the database of retained license plates. There are innumerable ways for this to be misused and almost no 
utility by SPD’s own data.  
57  
We should also consider the costs. SPD's clearance record is abysmal and it's probably not because they lack this 
particular technology given that most crimes are never associated with a particular vehicle with a known license 
plate.  
58  acab  
59  The potential for city government creating a right wing police state and future lawsuits.   
60  Whether they want any member of the the public to be able to track their comings and goings on a continual basis  
61  It is important to look at the possible repercussions and weigh that against the public good.  In this case the  benefit 
to the public far outweighs potential harm.   
62  
The above, and that turning our city into a surveillance machine under the purview of police officers with an awful 
track record is just blatantly a bad idea. If one of the members of city leadership had a falling out with a cop or 
pushed policy that was anti-police expansion, would they really want 3 months of tracked license plate data at 
those cops fingertips? I would hope they can see the risk involved through this anecdote.   
63  Value citizens privacy  
64  Crime and the perception of crime is up and is bad for the city.  
65  Privacy  
66  Consider residents' privacy.  
67  That it is unconstitutional  
68  
How many women die from domestic violence annually.  This publicly available information will escalate cases from 
mere harassment when abusers only have contact info, to assault and death when abusers can learn where their 
victims are physically located as part of their daily life habits.  Most people go to the same locations for work, 
worship and basic errands.    
69  Beyond having it on police vehicles, maybe have cameras set in high traffic areas or areas of concern to ping when 
known plates show up in the area.  
70  If you do approve this technology, please push back on department leadership who say that 90 days is an 
appropriate retention period for this type of data. If it is collected, it should absolutely not be stored for that long.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 74 
 
71  
1. Whether the marginal benefits of this technology outweigh severe privacy infringements and potential for 
misuse. 2. Time period allowed for retention of this information. 3. Limiting the scope of which department vehicles 
can use this information, if any. 4. Who can access this information. 5. Recordkeeping of access logs showing who 
within the police department is accessing this information and when.  
72  
The rights of the citizens, the real consequences of this technology, our right to privacy, the expansion of the 
surveillance state, the ways this people vulnerable to abuse, stalking, and other crimes by allowing personal data to 
be shared to literally anyone.   
73  Other jurisdictions strict standards for data retention and to make sure there are publicly visible 
checks/balances/reports for those who want to access the data.  
74  
I want the city to see how spending public dollars on things like this for police is a huge waste of resources that 
could be spend solving root issues. Also, I want the city to value citizen privacy and security. The police already have 
enough ability to surveil and track citizens.    
75  Please consider the likely harm by police and further distrust of SPD by the public.   
76  The impact to communities that are already over-policed  
77  
Studies of ALPR data show just 1% to 2% of license plates captured are either on a hot list or associated with any 
crime at all. Therefore, there is not a strong data case to be made for expansion of the program without a firm 
framework for public safety, limiting how data is accessed and shared, and reasonable data retention limits.  
78  
Consider in particular the use of this technology in elections. With only a license plate number, any political 
opponent would be able to track your movements across a 3 month period. Consider also that this dramatically 
expands the already considerable political power of the police and police officers guild.   
79  Please read what I said in question 1.  
80  
The police department spends a tiny fraction of its time investigating major crimes. They will not do more just 
because they have more surveillance - this surveillance information will be misused, and it isn't worth the cost, the 
harm, or the injustice it will inevitably spawn.  
81  Why does the police budget need to be so gigantic?  
82  
Have the police demonstrated quite clearly that they consider themselves to be above the law. They have also 
demonstrated clearly that they do not have any interest in reducing crime or even lifting a finger to do anything to 
help the victims of crime, for example by recovering stolen goods. This behavior has been rewarded with constant 
budget increases and now an expanded surveillance state.  
83  
Consider all the abuse vectors for people with access to this technology, whether through internal access or the 
freedom of information act. Consider immediately and automatically discarding any data not known to be 
associated with crimes. Even if that makes it slightly worse at detecting crimes that the police become aware of 
after the detection has happened, it makes it a lot more immune to abuse.  
84  Look at their past behavior and whether they seem to show respect for the civil liberties of Seattle citizens.  
85  Consider the impact on privacy and the way that other jurisdictions manage this data. Cars not involved in a crime 
should have the data either not captured at all or purged quickly from the system.  
86    
87    
88  Think about how easy it would be for anyone to simply request that data and have a map of your movements. If you 
don’t want that personally, then you have no business deciding that for anyone else.  
89    
90  Privacy, violation of the Constitution, misuse by police.   
91  The city leadership should bane the technology.  
92  Privacy. Ethical problems (already exhibited and hard to stop). Who has access and how it can be used to harm. It 
says it would be public information, hackers will use this! Scammers will use this!   
93  To not force your citizens into suck a predicament   
94  Consider how this money could be used to help the community at large instead of using this for surveillance of 
citizens which leads to abuse of power.   
95  People's comments, thoughts, and warnings.  
96  
The police department is meant to be a public service. SPD has shown again and again that they have no interest in 
serving the public. City leadership MUST hold them to task.   
Consider putting funds toward community services that are proven to reduce crime, rather than reckless technology 
that gives SPD further opportunity to deprive citizens of basic rights.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 75 
 
97  Do not store the data, the technology can be programmed to delete the data quickly.  
98  Do not implement this technology.   
99  This will make things even more dangerous for victims of abuse and dv!!  
100    
101  
If City decides the apparent benefits outweigh the massive, consistent invasion of privacy of every Seattle driver, 
they should at least limit the data retention period to 48 hours or less. If SPD cannot make use of the data in that 
amount of time, maybe they can spend less time harassing and killing innocent civilians.  
102  Please look into existing complaints to OPA regarding misuse of this and related technology by SPD as well as cases 
of misuse nationwide. Please consider how this technology might be misused to directly put people in danger.  
103  Think about doxing and how public info gets misused! It seems like a bad idea.   
104  
Safety, health, and welfare of the public.  City leadership needs to hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of 
the public.  Every poor vehicle driver needs to be taken out of the drivers seat and use transit/bike/walk.  Poor 
drivers need to understand how their actions impact others.  City leaders need to refrain from coddling poor 
drivers.  
105  Stop throwing money at the SPD.  
106  The policing alternative this money could pay for instead of police state tech toys.  
107  Approve for increased safety.   
108  Citizen privacy, SPD's heinous record of corruption, decrease in trust of law enforcement.  
109  Erase it within 48 hours unless linked to an ongoing investigation  
110  Privacy rights, budgetary costs, less invasive alternatives  
111  Technology is not neutral. It can and has been used inappropriately. Once it is in place and precedent is set, harm 
has been enabled, and it is very difficult to undo.  
112    
113  Pray to a loving caring wise humorous beautiful joyous higher power for guidance in this decision. Your soul is at 
stake. Stay awake!  
114  I would want them to simply not consider it at all  
115  Do. Not. Do. This.   
116  
Consider how a malicious actor (within or without the SPD) might be able to track and follow an individual without 
their knowledge. Now consider how many thousands of individuals could be tracked in the same way with no 
tangible benefit.   
117  
Also, how expensive is this going to be? The city has a massive budget problem right now; how is equipping the SPD 
with more expensive technology going to help this? They just got the "ShotSpotter" thing for 1.5 million dollars. 
Maybe use that new toy for a while first?   
118  Costs, Resources, Success Rates, Personal Privacy and Human Rights  
119  
All of the above. There have been at least three reported incidents of police using this database for personal 
purposes. Any vehicle data collected on innocent civilians who are not involved in any criminal activity should not 
be recorded or stored.  
120  unless the data retention time can be dramatically reduced from 90 days (less than 24 hours?), the technology 
should not be expanded to every police vehicle  
121  I want them to consider NOT expanding this technology and to do away with it entirely.  
122  Not Doing It At All.  
123  
Would a City employee consent to having their vehicle's whereabouts tracked, by any member of the public, with 
no opportunity to opt out? Would a police officer be in favor of any person being able to track their personal vehicle 
use? If not, this program should not be expanded and should, instead, be curtailed.  
124  Please approve this request ONLY if paired with legally binding requirements that prevent the creation of a 
surveillance database. And include an audit by a third party to verify our privacy.  
125  How many arrests can they make and will they actually get criminals off the streets.  
126  
The waste of money from a cost effective standpoint. The departments are already throwing money away on other 
pieces of technology, like the shot spotter and the lawsuits from officers abusing their power. The safety of largely 
women is also heightened when their movements can be tracked by abusive partners and other people in their 
lives.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 76 
 
127  Is this the right “solution” to your defined problem? What does precedent tell you about the misuse of this kind of 
collected data? About breaches?  
128    
129  
Reach of current SPD ALPR devices is already very broad. During 1 week in 2021, 9 active SPD ALPR devices logged 
nearly 100,000 reads, including outside Seattle city limits, according to analysis by University of Washington Center 
for Human Rights researchers: https://uwchr.github.io/spd-alpr/  
130  stop wasting money on surveillance tech  
131  Please be mindful of the rapid pace of AI and how unreliable it is.  
132  Curtail this data use to be purged within 48 hours or less.  
133  The disproportionate effect that incarceration has on vulnerable communities   
134  Fund other things like social services to make our streets and communities safer! Like the library, parks department 
or DESC!  
135  
This is not a hard technology problem. If the SPD cannot provide the same guarantees and timeframes that other 
jurisdictions can provide, that's not an excuse to approve this request. Rather, it's further evidence that the SPD's 
data control and management systems as so antiquated as to be evidence that abusing this data isn't a risk--it's a 
guarantee and only a matter of time.  
136  
I would like them to consider that crime in our city is constantly going up, we don't have enough police officers on 
the force, and can't hire/train them fast enough. I think if this would help take folks committing crimes off the 
public streets, I'm for it.  
137  Do not underestimate the risk of leaks or improper access; computer systems are not impregnable.  
138  Do not use it at all  
139    
140  The citizens (disproportionally black and brown) victimized by ongoing crime.  
141  This does not prevent crime in any way. Transfer the money to community initiatives to house and feed our cities 
most vulnerable, which has been shown to prevent crime.  
142  Consider eliminating this altogether.   
143  Do not adopt a policy that violate people’s right to privacy as provided under the US Constitution.   
144  Please consider all the better uses for this money, investments in the community that would actually increase public 
safety.  
145  I request that the City reject the expansion of the use of this technology.  
146  please listen to community. we care about our own safety and this will NOT help.   
147  The City leadership should take privacy concerns extremely seriously.  
148  How many criminals can you lock up?   
149    
150  Don't buy it. Invest in the community instead.  
151  If the City is going to install technology to can plates, they must also scan speed and stop people who are going 
more then 5 over the 25mph speed limit. Cars are killing people walking.  
152  SPD has other emergent issues at the present time, and new technology, procedures, staffing and other intangibles 
should not be introduced that could create further issues within the department.  
153  Do we really want to give SPD more toys or more power? Police solutions are rarely good solutions. Decrease the 
police budget, increase social services. It's that simple.   
154  Privacy/bias/database abuse   
155    
156  Personal privacy, and the ease with which the technology can be used by abusers.  
157  
I would want leadership to examine carefully whether capturing reams of potentially private data is worth the 
benefit, and to provide strict, enforceable guard rails to prevent data dissemination. I would like data to be held as 
briefly as possible, if at all.  
158  Who this will affect and how it empowers police to continue abusing its power  
159  
Is this technology addressing the root causes of harm in our community (housing unaffordability and insecurity, 
redlining and disinvestment in neighborhoods on the basis of race, lack of health and income supports)? Are there 
ways to improve health and reduce harm that do not rely on surveillance and policing that the city could fund 
instead?  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 77 
 
160  Please consider our human, and humane, rights of privacy.  
161  The impacts of who had access to this data and the many ways it can be misused     
162  Please see #1  
163  Please consider the privacy and autonomy of the citizens of this city. This type of policing is not ok.   
164  
Openly asking community members and giving information sessions, looking for real ways to connect with the 
community to increase public safety instead of trying to sneakily monitor people; pick better officers who are willing 
to work with people where they are and able to listen and work in a harm reduction model instead of an escalation 
and surveillance model, go out in the community and actually connect with people and do active patrols to be 
visible; ask SPD leadership at the precincts to instruct their staff to respond to calls and actually connect with the 
community and listen to their needs - currently response times are terrible, there is already a staffing crisis In SPD, 
and much too often there is no actual response for many hours because it seems that officers refuse to leave the 
precinct. Better accountability measures for officers that are not punishment based and look to train and correct 
behaviors to improve police community relations. There are many more important and needed things SPD can and 
should do to serve the community expanding monitoring, or teams like CRG that have no real value to the 
community does nothing to address the goals SPD outlined for this proposal , bring back community police teams 
localized in each neighborhood   
165  
As suggested above, I would strongly urge city leaders to consider that the use of this technology cannot be 
promised or predicted upfront. Once the information is available to police, new uses or abuses will be discovered 
and leveraged.   
166  
There is a very real danger to victims of abuse and stalking in keeping a registry of license plate locations. This 
danger only increases when you realize how commonly police are those perpetrators of abuse.  
Further, this technology undermines basic privacy and the ability of people to feel safe going about their lives. I, 
personally, would not feel safe visiting local queer support centers if I knew the government is building a profile 
about where I go. I can only imagine how much terrifying it is for others-- those who would not want to be on a 
registry for visiting abortion-giving clinics, or places of worship.   
167  
Leadership should think about the harm this can cause individuals going about their daily lives in Seattle. Especially 
those experienced domestic violence where people can look them up with a public records request. And with the 
disproportionate domestic violence perpetrated by police officers, this is also cause for concern with their access to 
this. Beyond this, increasing this technology will be hugely expensive and the city has more important things to fund 
that actually meet people’s needs.   
168  Purge the data much quicker than 90 days. 1 day is sufficient. Plus housing all that data is going to be expensive for 
90 days.   
169  The City Council and Mayor needs to consider their constituents privacy and the fact that the technology will also 
cause harm to innocent people  
170    
171  I want City leadership to, at minimum, avoid technologies that would enable routine surveillance of individuals not 
under investigation/not under a warrant. This is a huge overstep.  
172  Consider voting against this and all other surveillance technologies in public spaces funded by taxes, which includes 
roadways.   
173  Find a better use of our hard earned tax dollars.  
174  Civilian oversight into how civilian data are stored, protected, accessed, and expeditiously purged.   
175  
Consider how increasing the surveillance on citizens and the tracking of their movement limits their rights to 
privacy, and the INCREDIBLE number of ways this technology can be abused. Given the inefficacy of police in 
preventing or helping resolve any crime, why would additional technology to help them track and surveil more be 
beneficial to the public?  
176  
This technology is unnecessary, if you must expand money we spend on policing, an already bloated area of the city 
budget that sees zero returns on investment for public health and safety, please ensure that restriction is placed on 
the data this technology creates to limit unnecessary tracking of civilians. There are consequences to using this 
technology, expanding the constant surveillance and tracking innocent people throughout their lives with zero 
technological mitigations on that surveillance is an unacceptable consequence that should deter the technology 
from being used at all. We cannot create a jail cell for every citizen to live in just so that we may not worry about 
'crime', consider the humanity of everyone in the City and the desire of every human being for freedom from being 
constantly watched. Do NOT allow data from non-hits be kept for any longer than an hour, there is no excuse, the 
department cannot be so inept that it cannot identify a "significant image" within that time-frame.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 78 
 
177  
Recognize the opportunities for abuse of this data and put controls in place to ensure that it is not abused. The 
existing ALPR data has already been abused by SPD officers for harassing ex-lovers and ex-lovers new relationships. 
This is unacceptable and there must be guardrails against this kind of abuse.  
178  I would like them to consider who will benefit from increased surveillance.   
179    
180  
Like all data-gathering technology, it's very useful and also very easy to misuse. Any expansion of the use of this 
technology MUST be accompanied by an extensive set of guardrails around its use: how long is the data available; 
who can access it; when can they access it; what kind of evidence request do they have to make to access it.  
181  Digital privacy rights being violated by the blanket use of this tech  
182  
A thorough risk-benefit analysis must be done for such a sweeping change. The expansion of this techology cannot 
be approved until strict and mandatory audits and regulations are in place. Require that SPD explain in great detail 
why non-hit license plate images must be kept for months, while other jurisdictions purge them almost 
immediately. SPD should be made to PROVE that the benefits outweigh the risks - it cannot be assumed. SPD has 
already proven that even officers within their own ranks have used this technology improperly and for criminal 
stalking. Thus, they cannot be trusted to make promises about the utility of this technology without data to back 
them up.  
183  
The City should first set up appropriate systems and safeguards so that it can handle these data appropriately 
before seeking to expand the system. To do this the City first needs to learn from other states like NH and set up a 
system that can quickly identify data relevant to crimes and purge the rest. There should be an additional safeguard 
that the data of any innocent citizens should not become a public record.  
184  Rather than funding efforts to 'catch more criminals' at the cost of 'pesky civil liberty' please try to focus on changes 
worthy of upholding.  
185  
Put a premium on privacy, and let the data lead us to the most effective tools. Generally solid investigations and 
building trust and relationships in communities. That starts with addressing the culture problems in our police 
force.   
186  
Does it feel "safer" having your personal information secretly scanned without your knowledge and put into a 
police/publicly available database when you were going to the grocery store or on the way to your house or just 
passing through? No, this does not improve public safety.  
187  Consider how data is weaponized in our modern world.  
188  
The council rejected amendments to add money to our city foodbanks this year. Income disparity and food 
insecurity are major problems the city is facing - and even a small amount of money can make a huge difference 
when it comes to food security. Spending money surveilling Seattle citizens should not be council's priority.  
189  
These steps toward techno-solutionism in our public institutions cannot be taken without the expressed consent 
and overwhelming support of the people whose data, privacy, and lives are at risk. The constant pushing of the 
needle towards increased 0collection and maintenance of detailed information about multiple aspects of our lives 
as the price to pay for participation in public spaces has already gone too far, and this will only take us further in the 
direction of fear, surveillance, and corruption.  
190  This will not help prevent any violent crime but will be used by nefarious users to stalk intimidate and harass 
constituents   
191  
Please consider the safety of people experiencing domestic violence, people trying to escape trafficking, people 
seeking access to services such as abortions, and people who are being stalked, to name just a few situations in 
which access to tracking information could pose severe-- even deadly-- risk to the people in them. This includes 
civilians who have no personal relationships to SPD officers, but who may have people in their lives who would use 
access to this information to hurt them, and it also absolutely includes people who have personal relationships to 
SPD officers-- multiple SPD officers have already used ALPR technology to stalk people in their personal lives and NO 
ONE (SPD or civilian) should be able to access such sensitive information.   
192  Is sacrificing the freedoms of privacy and laying the ground work for mass surveillance of the public worth a possible 
small change in road crime?  
193  Look at other states that quickly discard the surveillance infomation..  
194  
As we are paying for the love of tech and damning efficacy, community involvement in implementing and a MOU of 
this surveillance program and local tech TB purchased/ considered from local vendor.  Lastly no bevy of paid 
consultants to monitor, disseminate or staff this misadventure.  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 79 
 
195  
A large majority of the non-white community in Seattle already has difficulty trusting the city council, and even less 
so the SPD, which again, has repeatedly shown bias against particularly Black, Native, and Hispanic communities for 
several decades. Adding a way to track vehicles is dystopian and would erode that trust further.  
196  
Consider the killing of Manuel Ellis. Consider all the misuses of power of SPD. Consider their handling of the 2020 
protests. Consider the ways that police have tracked and killed activists, innocent women, and even just those they 
have political or personal grudges against. Consider all the fucking ways this technology could be abused and for so 
little potential value.   
197  
City leadership should consider the wants of the residents of Seattle. This level of surveillance, available to both SPD 
and the general public, is outrageous and dangerous. This is again an attempt to justify the increase in spending for 
SPD without producing anything of value for Seattle residents.  
198  
The use of this technology should be not be expanded, rather it should be curtailed or eliminated. The system 
should not retain any data related to non-hits for a period longer than three minutes. If the system can't meet this 
requirement it should be scrapped, and only replaced by one that can and does.  
199  
The certain impact on people's privacy.  
  
The liability of having to safeguard this information once collected. The potential damages the public can claim if 
this information is abused or exposed to adversaries.  
200    
201  
Consider the costs - both financial and erosion of civil liberties - that expanding this camera program represents. 
SPD shouldn't be wasting their time and resources with a system that can't automate looking through massive 
numbers of images and being able to quickly determine whether they need to be retained our not. It is 
unacceptable that these images be kept for up to 90 days and that they can be accessed both by law enforcement 
and members of the public via public disclosure.  
202  
Have the database that people's identification information stored in emptied much more often than the current 90 
day mark. SPD stores this information for already much longer than many other departments around the country.  
  
Record who has access to the database. If the OIG doesn't know which officers can access this database and there 
are reports showing that current police officers have accessed information on an ex's new partner, or information 
on a domestic violence situation and then revealed that to a party involved, there needs to be a way to hold those 
people accountable. That this is not already a policy or practice is irresponsible and shocking.  
203    
204  Privacy laws and the collection of data about citizens who have not committed any crimes  
205  
SPD's case closure rate has continued to decline despite increases in budget and new technologies. This is a waste 
of money that could be put towards solving root causes of crime, rather than give SPD officers a way to track any 
citizen they please.  
206  Consider that this is taking rights away from good hard-working Americans Freedom that we are entitled to privacy 
is being stripped from us and this is absolute violation  
207  The fact that police always lie and are never held accountable. Providing them yet another source of data to surveil 
the population for no gain should not fly.   
208  Putting the privacy of people over what SPD wants for surveilling people    
209  Don't adopt it  
210    
211  That we don’t want more money going toward police or policing   
212  This is police overreach that invades people's privacy.  
213  To not do it  
214  
SPD do not need more technology with which to further abuse our trust. This is a notoriously corrupt police force. 
OPA has received an average of 1,200 allegations of police misconduct over the last few years. There are numerous 
examples of SPD inappropriately accessing data: for example, in 2021, a police officer used his access to databases 
to track his ex's new boyfriend.   
  
Now they want more surveillance tools?   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 80 
 
215  
the fact that this will very likely reduce the public’s trust in police and I am very certain that bad actors, in SPD, city 
government, and private individuals will use this info to harass people they don’t like or have political differences 
with. Think about how this could affect folks escaping DV, to have this information publicly available could put them 
in harms way. 40% of law enforcement spouses report DV. Keep that in mind…  
216  Do not further entrench your constituents in a hostile surveillance state.   
217  To not move forward and spend the $$ elsewhere.  
218  Consider alternatives that give to our community rather than increasing surveillance.   
219  Consider the ease with which members of the public will be able to download the data and keep it forever.  
220  Think on compromising your privacy.  
  
Question 6: Do you have additional comments/considerations that leadership 
should take into account when making a decision about this technology?  
ID  Do you have additional comments/considerations that leadership should take into account when making a 
decision about this technology?  
1  
Republican attorneys general have been seeking methods to extract information about their residents fleeing 
red states to blue states seeking reproductive or gender affirming care. City leadership should find a way to 
prevent this technology - especially the database - from helping to prosecute individuals who lawfully enter 
Washington state for these healthcare needs.   
2    
3    
4  Shouldn't police do police work? Maybe have better ways to police than mass surveillance.  
5    
6    
7  Implement it yesterday  
8    
9    
10  NA  
11    
12    
13    
14    
15    
16  Absolutely do not do this.   
17    
18    
19    
20  Trust is earned, not given and the SPD have not earned the trust needed for this type of request. They need to 
work through the existing problems and remediate them before they can be given any additional abilities.   
21  The City spent approximately one third of its total budget on SPD. It's well beyond time to stop throwing money 
away by buying them every shiny toy they want.   
22    
23  Don’t expand this don’t use it  
24  No  
25    
26  Please show respect for the obvious, blatant, invasion of privacy of this is & ultimately how innocent people 
may be victims of this data.  
27  The SPD has abused this system in the past. The ALPR system will allow for abuse of power that is arguably goes 
against the 4th Amendment of US Constitution.   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 81 
 
28    
29  This is all so creepy. How are you even having this conversation?!  
30    
31  No  
32  
SPD continues to employ officers convicted of crimes and who have committed gross misconduct. Until we can 
get to a point where SPD is not employing individuals who have demonstrated a lack of willingness to comply 
with the law and SPD policy, leadership should not allow the authorization of any technologies that could be 
abused. The department also needs to implement better systems to prevent technology it already uses from 
continuing to be abused.   
33  Stop this insanity. Only you can prevent forest fires.   
34  This is a terrible idea   
35    
36    
37    
38  Seattle has been a leader of police reform since 2020. There is no need to expand police powers and set back 
years of work.   
39  Don’t vote for it. Otherwise, this will be a stain on your record.   
40    
41    
42    
43    
44    
45  You don't rule us  
46  Technology is a cheap choice. Not in terms of money but in terms of care for our community. Not everything 
can be fixed with tech regardless of who’s selling it.   
47    
48    
49  Communicate with insurance providers to seek input, and possible technology funding, relative on the 
tangential benefit to that industry.   
50    
51    
52  The untrustworthiness of the SPD   
53    
54    
55    
56    
57    
58  acab  
59  Do you want your private vehicle and personal location tracked by police?  
60  Please oppose any measures that increase broad spectrum surveillance.  
61    
62    
63    
64  Enforcing rules is how you maintain a civic society  
65    
66    
67  Don't do it.  
68  
With budget cuts looming and the police already having a disproportionate amount of that budget, this is a 
poor use of that money.  The citizens of Seattle marched for George Floyd for days to protect against police 
overreach.  This would give cops more power in direct opposition to the will of the average Seattlite.   
69    
70    
71    
72  why does SPD need 90 days of data when plenty of other jurisdictions delete this data so quickly?? does SPD 
just suck at their job?   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 82 
 
73    
74    
75  No to this and no to shot spotter.  
76    
77    
78  
Consider also the security and cost of storing this data. Data storage isn't free and the security is never perfect. 
What are the infrastructure costs of storing this much data (again, data that has no investigative benefit and a 
massive amount of liability)?  
What would the fallout be if this system were hacked or the data leaked? Data in storage is vulnerable data. 
The longer data is held in storage the longer it is vulnerable.   
79  Please read all of the text that I submitted in question 1.   
80    
81  Police have always used their tools to oppress people and engage in campaigns of systematic harassment of 
anyone who criticizes them.    
82  I know it is hard for you, but please consider that the police are over-funded and the rest of the city is woefully 
under-funded.  
83    
84    
85  We should be concerned NOT ONLY with how the police could use this data (which should be a concern), but 
also with how the public can use this data.  
86    
87    
88    
89    
90  Cops and the mayor love new, untested, expensive cop toys like the shotspotter and this proposed garbage. 
Stop it!   
91  The city leadership should listen to the will of the people, or be ousted from government by them.  
92  Yes, we don't know who will have access to this data and what harm it can do. Not every police officer is 
trustworthy with such information. There are already proven abuses from this kind of close information.  
93  To  listen to the community   
94  I will be actively campaigning against this   
95  yes, have they done any research themselves on ALPR?  
96    
97    
98    
99  This will make things even more dangerous for victims of abuse and dv!!  
100    
101    
102    
103    
104  Expand ALPR.  Red lights.  Speeding.  It is within the city's power to make our city safe for everyone, to attain 
vision zero goals if leaders expand this technology to "drive" every poor driver from the streets of Seattle.  
105    
106    
107    
108    
109    
110  Stop spying on people!  
111    
112    
113    
114    
115  How are you going to ensure this will not be used to discriminate against marginalized folks? Especially when 
it’s in the hands of SPD who have a LONG history of discrimination.   
116    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 83 
 
117    
118  Read the reports. Review the literature. Know the facts.  
119  
Will there be a means for vehicle drivers and owners to opt out of this database? What is the argument for 
making this database publicly available to the public and worldwide (assuming it is made available on the 
Internet), versus keeping it for use only by law enforcement? What safety measures are in place to ensure law 
enforcement personnel or would-be abusers are using this database in a sanctioned manner, with permanent 
logging of all usage? Will all use of the database be recorded, such that if someone is raped, attacked, killed, 
etc., by a criminal who used the database to locate their target, then the criminal’s IP address and own 
database usage can be used to identify and locate them?  
120  public confidence in our police force is the issue  
121  From an equity and a human rights standpoint, ALPR is a bad direction for our city to move in and does not add 
the value that proponents argue for.  
122  
"Law Enforcement" has a tendency to you know ask for things that are Against the best interest of citizens 
while talking about homicides, robbery, kidnapping and pearl clutching about The Children.  
  
This is precicely the same formula.  
123    
124  
I support our police having tools to do their jobs. But only with well defined limits and third party audits. This 
technology comes with significant risks to the public good. Let's do it right. Flagging known plates is fine. Mass 
data collection is not.  
125  No  
126  Stop wasting money and focus on fixing your culture and training. No one can trust you when you have so many 
bad actors.  
127    
128    
129  
Under current data retention and public records policies, anyone could obtain up to 90 days of SPD's ALPR 
records and track the movements of specific license plates throughout the region. This presents significant 
privacy concerns.  
130    
131    
132  Seattle barely is starting to trust cops again, this will not improve the situation  
133    
134  Please stop this incessant need to spy on the community and instead look to invest into it!   
135    
136  Think more about the lives this will save or crimes this will help solve, more than if we should use it. If we use it 
responsively it is well worth the additional cost.  
137    
138    
139    
140    
141    
142  Require deletion of non-matched data as soon as the matching process is complete.  
143    
144    
145    
146    
147    
148    
149    
150  This technology will hurt not heal our communities.  
151    
152    
153  
Police don't need more tech. If anything, they should be on foot more making face to face interactions with 
people. We don't trust the police because they're an occupying force. We don't know them. They aren't from 
our neighborhoods.   
154    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 84 
 
155    
156  Same.  
157  None right now.  
158  No  
159    
160    
161    
162  
For any retained data, assume that it can be obtained by those who will do the worst things with it. Facebook 
and google data provide great examples of how states with agendas can extract information via court requests 
and do things with that data that impact human rights.  
163    
164  
Try harder, instead of looking for the easiest route look internally to assess training and corrective procedures 
so that staff are better equipped to handle complicated calls. Connect with the community and be open about 
intent instead of trying to sneak in extra surveillance measures   
165    
166    
167    
168  Consider budgetary overruns and impact for privacy.   
169    
170    
171  Leadership should consider not just intended uses of data but also the potential for abuse and harm that exist if 
the data is not used as intended.  
172  
Overreach of power - capacity to track movements and retain info on people - high cost of this technology 
when there are other pressing needs/ social services that should be funded - the potential for abuse of this data 
by police - the potential for abuse of this data by other than police - I oppose increasing surveillance of people 
going about their day-to-day lives.  
173  Listen to the public. Many of your policies fly in the face of the public good.  
174    
175    
176    
177    
178    
179    
180  
Is the benefit to the police department large enough to offset the cost to our privacy. Is the police department 
prepared to respond to the spike in DV calls when abusers have accessed their exes' travel logs using FOIA 
resources. Is the police department actually able to disregard looking at the patterns in traffic around big 
planned protests in order to protect the Constitutional right to privacy of citizens, or will they insist that 
reviewing that data is necessary for public safety.  
181    
182  
Any proposal that includes sharing data with other states or agencies outside of Seattle should be a non-starter. 
Any proposal to store non-hit images for 90 days should be a dealbreaker in terms of expanding this 
technology.  
183    
184    
185    
186  
The city desperately needs more extreme weather shelters for both increasingly cold winters and consistently 
smoke-ridden summers for the homeless population as well as people whose houses are not equipped for 
extreme weather. Extreme weather shelter expansion would be a much better use of these city funds and 
improve public safety far more than expanding automatic surveillance technologies which will actually diminish 
public safety.  
187    
188  
Please consider this technologies efficacy. If the technology were able to solve crime it would be worth while to 
consider. But given that 0.2 percent of plate scans are linked to criminal activity and the number of concerns 
this tech brings and potential abuses, please weigh carefully benefits and risk as well as consider how this $ 
could be better spent. If we are concerned about car theft - our tax payor dollars would be much better spent 
on lighting and environmental improvements that have been shown to reduce crime. This would produce a 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 85 
 
greater benefit to the public in terms of public safety without any concerns for the privacy of law-abiding 
citizens.  
189    
190  
Those in witness protection or in refugee status or otherwise at risk of stalking or surveillance should not be 
able to be documented at locations that are then accessible through FOIA, public records requests and through 
as large of a network as the Spd   
191    
192  see Edward Snowden  
193    
194  See above   
195  
You have the power to make this community better and safer; allowing a uniformed police force to track cars at 
their own discretion leaves an unacceptable risk of targeting non-white communities. Please consider spending 
whatever funding this takes on something that tangibly helps the community at large.  
196    
197    
198  When this information is collected it becomes subject to abuse by both authorized and unauthorized parties. 
We cannot effectively prevent this access, or abuse, therefore we should not collect the data.  
199    
200  
SPD has not demonstrated it’s a good steward of license plate data, so it should not be permitted to retain 
data. Other police departments accomplish their goals without the need to retain this data, so SPD should be 
able to operate without retaining license plate data.  
201    
202  
Is the technology actually useful? Technology like this is always touted as something amazing that will 
revolutionize some part of something, but not only is it expensive, it's benefits are always way overstated. Is 
the expansion of the program really necessary? Or is it just something that a department wants to do?   
203    
204  Protect privacy  
205    
206    
207    
208    
209    
210    
211  Defund SPD and expand housing as fast as possible   
212    
213    
214    
215  
Fuck this technology. Fuck shotspotter. Fuck SPD. Fuck SPOG. When will you listen to the people of this city? 
We do NOT trust SPD or SPOG and never will. There needs to be a major overhaul in Seattle regarding “law 
enforcement”. We should be a leading city when it comes to this, we should live up to our reputation. But 
instead we hide and cower and think state-sanctioned gangs will keep us safe. WE keep us safe.  
216    
217  Privacy and time of when spd deletes the information. Should be able to follow other cities if this moves 
forward (which it should not).  
218    
219    
220  Read 1984.  
  
Question 7: Do you have any additional comments or questions?  
ID  Do you have any additional comments or questions?  
1  I think it's good that SPD is aggressively going after stolen property. I just don't want the database to come back to 
haunt us, so more policy control over that should be implemented prior to the expansion.  
2    
3    
4    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 86 
 
5    
6    
7  Quit being a libtard  
8    
9  Is this only to be installed on vehicles or will there be stationary roadside cameras as well? What are the equity 
implications for neighborhoods that have more police vehicle traffic than others?   
10  I understand that the issue at hand is increasing the use of this technology, but my honest preference is that its use 
be discontinued entirely.   
11    
12    
13    
14    
15    
16    
17    
18    
19    
20    
21  Council recently told Seattle teachers there was no money to pay them a living wage during a period of historic 
inflation. Why are we even considering spending millions on Orwellian programs in light of that?  
22    
23    
24  No  
25    
26  Do not allow this in good conscience. As I write this, there have been three violent crimes in my neighborhood, per 
Citizen. I would rather there be more effort actually taking care of our neighborhoods. On foot. In real life.  
27    
28    
29  I’m sickened that this is even being discussed. We’re tracked enough; why add to the already crushingly 
demoralizing feeling of living in a world that monitors people’s every breath?   
30    
31  No  
32    
33  For the people, by the people!   
34    
35    
36    
37    
38    
39  n/a  
40    
41    
42    
43    
44    
45    
46    
47    
48    
49  
The issue is public safety in the global use of the term. While implementation and use of the proposed technology 
is re-active, it is an opportunity to prevent follow-on criminal activity, recover individuals and property, reduce road 
rage, etc. Law enforcement clearly understand the issue. Supporting data goes back decades. An independent 
agency along with the justice department, not city leadership, needs to be authorized to review all historical data 
(including abuses associated with the technology), communicate with others currently using similar systems, 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 87 
 
specifically define the desired outcome, assess implementation with appropriate guardrails, transparently 
communicate with the public - including annual or semi-annual reporting of outcomes of the use of the technology, 
any abuses and means to prevent further abuses, lessons learned.  
50    
51    
52  no  
53    
54    
55    
56  I wish the city council to know this will absolutely effect my vote in future elections. I will not vote for anyone who 
supports this technology.  
57    
58  acab  
59  Never increase police surveillance. Always protect citizen privacy.   
60    
61    
62    
63    
64    
65    
66    
67    
68  People will be murdered as a direct result of this.  Most of the murder victims will be women.    
69    
70    
71    
72    
73    
74    
75  Defund the police. Fund human services.   
76    
77    
78    
79    
80    
81    
82  it is terrifying that this proposal was allowed to advance this far.  
83    
84    
85    
86    
87    
88    
89    
90  Don't give the cops anymore expensive toys to invade our privacy.   
91    
92  I have concerns for undocumented immigrants with this system.   
93    
94  None   
95    
96    
97    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 88 
 
98    
99  This will make things even more dangerous for victims of abuse and dv!!  
100    
101    
102    
103    
104  Additional comments: Do not coddle poor drivers!  
105    
106    
107    
108    
109    
110    
111    
112    
113    
114    
115  
Please invest money in important systems! It is embarrassing that SPS is in such a funding defect and instead of 
supporting and uplifting the youth of Seattle, you are only creating things that will make it less welcoming for 
them.   
116    
117    
118    
119  
What will keep anyone on the internet from downloading a copy of this database on a periodic basis, creating 
essentially a permanent record potentially spanning years of all vehicles’ data that is recorded? How robust is the 
authentication system that may be used to protect the database from download?  
120    
121    
122  Tell Them "Nyet Comrade".  
123    
124    
125  Why aren't you arresting people for committing crimes?   
126    
127    
128    
129    
130    
131    
132  This is police overreach and a response in the form of a ballot measure will likely follow if city leadership doesn't 
address this promptly  
133    
134  No, shame on the SPD for investing in this technology  
135    
136  Considering the past decision from the city council on police enforcement policies, I am hoping that  they have 
learned their lessons and that public safety is one of the top issues right now in the city.  
137    
138    
139    
140    
141    
142    
143    
144    
145    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 89 
 
146    
147    
148  Everyday this week somebody is shooting in the CD - we are living in the middle of a gang war and it's just a matter 
of time before a stray bullet kills (another) person who isn't involved in the gang war.   
149    
150  Why do you think this is a good idea?  
151    
152    
153  No, this covers it. I have work to do and shouldn't even have to be doing this survey. It should be common sense 
that we need police that look a lot like they do in other developed countries.   
154    
155    
156    
157  None right now.  
158  Stop giving the police more resources and put them back into the community  
159    
160    
161    
162    
163    
164  None  
165  It makes me very proud of this city that I am able to submit my concerns for consideration. I thank city leaders for 
their time.  
166  This is a terrible idea, don't waste our collective tax money on this.  
167    
168    
169  Please vote NO on APLR  
170    
171    
172    
173  I hope the results of this questionnaire are available via FOIA.  
174    
175    
176    
177    
178    
179    
180  
When I'm out and about in public I may not have any reasonable expectation of privacy. However there's no need 
to make it easy for outside people to track me down. Since New Hampshire proved it's possible for this system to 
work when purging unneeded photos every 3 minutes, there's no possible reason for SPD to keep my pictures for 3 
months.  
181    
182    
183    
184    
185    
186    
187    
188    
189    
190    
191    
192    
193    

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 90 
 
194  Just found out about this survey today, this is the concern about transparency and info access.  
195  Yes: what of the six Seattle Police Department officers who were found to be on the National Mall during the 
January 6, 2021 riots in Washington, DC?   
196    
197    
198  
Do not expand this technology to any new vehicles. Do not retain any data related to non-hits for a period longer 
than 3 minutes. If that is not possible, do not collect and retain it at all. If it is to be collected it should only be 
retained the period minimally feasible, and in no wise for longer than an hour, otherwise just don't do it. At all. 
Period.  
199    
200    
201    
202    
203    
204    
205    
206    
207    
208    
209    
210    
211  Stop the sweeps, any problem caused by a person living in a tent or a car can be addressed without forcing them to 
move   
212    
213    
214    
215  
Don’t pass this. This is gross and disgusting and scary. My communities do not have good relations with police and 
this will only worsen it. If you want to gain the respect and trust of Seattlites, please listen to us. Otherwise I 
imagine folks will continue to fight this and take it to the streets.  
216    
217    
218    
219    
220    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 91 
 
ALPR Public Comment received via Privacy Inbox  
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 92 
 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 93 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 94 
 
  
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 95 
 
  
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 96 
 
Letter received via Privacy email inbox:   

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 97 
 
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 98 
 
  
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 99 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 100 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 101 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 102 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix B: Public Comment Analysis | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-Wide 
ALPR |page 103 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix C: Public Comment Demographics | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-
Wide ALPR |page 104 
 
Appendix C: Public Comment Demographics 
Material Update ALPR Public Comment: Received via Microsoft form   
Optional Demographics:   
Age Range:   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix C: Public Comment Demographics | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-
Wide ALPR |page 105 
 
Optional Demographics: Neighborhood  
  
 
 

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix C: Public Comment Demographics | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-
Wide ALPR |page 106 
 
Optional Demographics: Gender  
  
Optional Demographics: Race / Ethnicity 
  
  

Att 1 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) 
V2 
 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD Appendix D: Comment Analysis Methodology | Surveillance Impact Report | Fleet-
Wide ALPR |page 107 
 
 
Appendix D: Comment Analysis Methodology 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix E: Questions and Department Responses 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix F: Public Outreach Overview 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix G: Meeting Notice(s) 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix H: Meeting Sign-in Sheet(s) 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix I: All Comments Received from Members of the 
Public 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix J: Letters from Organizations or Commissions  
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix K: Supporting Policy Documentation 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 
Appendix L: CTO Notification of Surveillance Technology 
Please refer to the original SIR (CB 120025). 

Overview I Condensed Surveillance Impact Report I ALPR (Patrol) I page i Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD  
Att 2 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet-Wide) Executive Overview 
V1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202 3 Surveillance Impact Report Executive Overview  
 
 
Automated License Plate 
Recognition (ALPR) 
(Fleet-Wide)  
Seattle Police Department  

Att 2 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet -Wide) Executive Overview 
Vl 
Overview I Condensed Surveillance Impact Report I ALPR (Patrol) I page 2 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD 
 
 
 
Overview 
The Operational Policy statements in this document represent the only allowable uses of the 
equipment and data collected by this technology. 
This Executive Overview documents information about the collection,  use, sharing, security and 
access controls for data that is gathered through Seattle Police Department's (SPD) Automated 
License Plate Reader (ALPR) system. All  information provided here is contained in the body of 
the full Surveillance Impact Review (SIR) document but is  provided in a condensed 
format for easier access and consideration. 
 
  Note: All use of ALPR as described in this document and the SIR is governed by SPD Policy 16.170 
1.0 Technology Description 
The Seattle Police Department would expand our current  nineteen vehicles with ALPR to a fleet-
wide deployment.  ALPR hardware consists of high definition infrared digital cameras that will be 
mounted to all Patrol cars, and other SPD vehicles. 
The high-speed cameras capture images of license plates  as they move into view, and 
associated software deciphers  the characters on the plate, using optical character recognition. 
This interpretation is then immediately checked against any license plate numbers that have 
been uploaded into the onboard, in -vehicle software system.  
 
2.0 Purpose 
Operational Policies: 
ALPR systems will only be deployed for official law enforcement purposes. These 
deployments are limited to: 
1. Locating wanted, endangered or missing persons; or those violating 
protection orders; 
2. Locating stolen vehicles; 
3. Locating stolen license plates; 
4. Canvassing the area around a crime scene; and 
5. Locating vehicles under SCOFFLAW 
 
 
Seattle Police Department uses Automated License Plate Reader (ALPR) technology to recover 
stolen vehicles, to locate subjects of Amber and Silver Alerts and fugitives where vehicle license 
plate information is available, to assist with active investigations,  to facilitate the flow of traffic 
(by monitoring and enforcing City  parking restrictions)  and for Scofflaw Ordinance 
enforcement. 

Att 2 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet -Wide) Executive Overview 
Vl 
Overview I Condensed Surveillance Impact Report I ALPR (Patrol) I page 3 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD 
 
 
 
Patrol ALPR assists the City in locating and recovering stolen vehicles. ALPR systems may assist 
with active investigations by helping to determine the location of vehicles of interest - 
specifically those identified as being associated with an investigation. SPD uses ALPR to 
recover stolen vehicles, which are often used by thieves to commit other crimes. 
 
3.0 Data Collection and Use 
Operational Policy: 
ALPR technology collects digital images of license plates and associated license plate 
numbers. The technology collects the date and time the license plate passes a 
digital-image site where an ALPR is located. 
Data collected from ALPR includes  license plate image, computer-interpreted read of the license 
plate number, date, time, and GPS location.  
All ALPR-equipped vehicles upload a daily Hotlist from the Washington State Patrol that 
contains national stolen vehicle plate data published daily  by the FBI. The Washington State 
Patrol places the Hotlist file on a server available through ACCESS to those agencies that have a 
specific and signed agreement with WSP to access and use the information. The receiving local 
law enforcement may supplement the list with additional information, such as vehicles sought 
with reasonable suspicion that they  are involved in an incident or vehicles sought pursuant to a 
warrant. 
 
4.0 Data Minimization & Retention 
Operational Policies: 
ALPR will not be used to intentionally capture images in private area or areas where a 
reasonable expectation of privacy exists, nor shall it be used to harass, intimidate or 
discriminate against any individual or group. 
 
When the ALPR system registers a hit,  a match to a license plate number listed on the Hotlist 
(as described in 2.3 above), the user must verify accuracy before  taking any action. For 
instance, when the system registers a  hit on a stolen vehicle, the user must visually verify that 
the system accurately read the license plate and,  if so, must then contact Dispatch to verify 
accuracy of the hit - that the vehicle is actually listed as stolen. Only then does the user act. 
 
Unless a hit has been flagged for investigation and  exported from the database for this purpose, 
all captured data is automatically deleted after 90 days, per department  retention policy. Data 
related to a flagged hit is downloaded and maintained with the investigation  file for the 
retention period related to the incident type.  No backup data is captured or retained.

Att 2 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet -Wide) Executive Overview 
Vl 
Overview I Condensed Surveillance Impact Report I ALPR (Patrol) I page 4 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD 
 
 
 
5.0 Access & Security 
Operational Policies: 
1. Only Employees Trained in the Use of ALPR Equipment Will Use and Access ALPR 
Devices and Data 
2. Employees Accessing ALPR Data Must Login Through the ALPR Password-Protected 
System 
3. Employees Conducting Searches in the ALPR System Will Provide a Case Number 
and Justification for the Search 
4. Employees Will Not Share ALPR Passwords and Login Credentials 
5. The Department will store ALPR data in a secured law enforcement facility with 
multiple layers of security protection. Firewalls, authentication and other 
reasonable security measures will be utilized. Only trained Department 
employees can access stored ALPR data and all data search requests are logged 
within the system. 
6. ALPR data maintained on BOSS will only be accessed by trained, SPD employees 
for official law enforcement purposes. This access is limited to: 
• Search of specific or partial plate(s) and/or vehicle identifiers as related to: 
• A crime in progress; 
• A search of a specific area as it relates to a crime in progress; 
• A criminal investigation; or 
• A search for a wanted person; or 
• Community caretaking functions such as locating an endangered or 
missing person. 
• Officers/detectives conducting searches  in the system will  complete the 
Read Query  screen documenting the justification  for the search and 
applicable case number. 
• Administration and maintenance 
 
Access 
Prior to gaining access to the ALPR system, potential users must be trained by other trained 
officers. Once this training has been verified with the ALPR administrator, users are given access 
and must log into the system with unique login and password information whenever they 
employ the technology. They remained logged into the system the entire time that the ALPR 
system is in operation. The login is logged and auditable. Officers are assigned the vehicles to 
use while on-shift. 
 
Security 
All data collected from the ALPR system is stored, maintained, and managed on premises on a 
CJIS-certified evidence retention platform . ALPR systems maintain  access logs on backend 
servers that are accessible for audit The Office of Inspector General may access all data and 
audit for compliance at any time.  

Att 2 – 2023 SIR: Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR) (Fleet -Wide) Executive Overview 
Vl 
Overview I Condensed Surveillance Impact Report I ALPR (Patrol) I page 5 Retroactive Technology Request By: SPD 
 
 
 
 
6.0 Data Sharing and Accuracy 
Operational Policy: 
ALPR data will only be shared with other law enforcement or prosecutorial agencies 
for official law enforcement purposes or as otherwise permitted by law.  
 
SPD has no data-sharing partners for ALPR. No person outside of SPD has direct access to the 
PIPS system or the data while it resides in the system or technology. ALPR data will  only be 
shared with other law enforcement or prosecutorial agencies for  official law enforcement 
purposes or as otherwise permitted by  law. SPD does not pool its ALPR data with any  other 
agency's data. 
 
Requests for ALPR data by non-law enforcement or non- prosecutorial agencies will be 
processed by the Legal Unit pursuant to the applicable Rules  of Civil or Criminal Discovery or 
the Washington Public  Records Act, Chapt. 42.56 RCW. The Legal Unit will maintain requests 
for ALPR data by non-law enforcement  or non-prosecutorial agencies. 
 
Per City of Seattle's Privacy Statement, outlining commitments to the public about how we 
collect and manage their data:  We do not sell personal information to third  parties for 
marketing purposes or for  their own commercial use. The full Privacy Statement may  be 
found here. 
 
 
7.0 Equity Concerns 
Operational Policy: 
ALPR will not be used to intentionally capture images in private area or areas where a 
reasonable expectation of privacy exists, nor shall it be used to harass, intimidate or 
discriminate against any individual or group. 
 
ALPR is content-neutral; it does not identify the race of the driver or the registered owner of 
the vehicle. To ensure that SPD continues to build trust with community members and increase 
racial equity, SPD must continue to follow its  policy of limiting use of the ALPR cars to strictly 
routine patrol and the use of collected ALPR data to specific criminal investigations or 
community caretaking functions, as well as limiting access to the ALPR system to authorized SPD 
personnel. Further, SPD must also continue to audit the system on a regular basis to provide a 
measure of accountability.  In doing so, SPD can mitigate the appearance of disparate treatment 
of individuals based on factors other than true criminal activity and minimize perceived over 
surveillance of areas where historically targeted communities reside or congregate.